LEGENDS OF THE  DRAGON ISLESPlayer Quick Reference
Write your character in your own words, including the following information:

Name and Idea - Who are you and what should we call you?
Themes - Write two (2) core concepts, for your ancestry (e.g. “Elf”) and background (e.g. “Soldier”). Add a creative “signature” to each to make it yours (e.g. “Elf - from Dorthonien”, or “Soldier - mercenary recruit”).
Traits - Write five (5) qualities or skills, e.g. “strong”, “patient”, “climbing”, “juggling”, “handsome”, or “quick-witted”.
Assets - Write five (5) common items, e.g. dagger, spear, backpack, water skin, tinder box, etc. These are ordinary items of average or lower quality.
Dark Secret - Write one (1) aspect of your past that you hide from others.
Secrets - Ask the GM about special powers, magic spells, etc.
Signature Assets - Ask the GM about special items, magic items, etc.
Experience Path - Write one (1) motive or goal; this is how you “level-up”.

Rolling Dice
The game is player-facing, meaning players make most of the rolls and do so in-character. (The GM seldom rolls.) The standard player roll is a simple 1d20 with no modifiers. You succeed if you roll the Hazard or higher, otherwise you fail. You Fumble if you roll Stress or below. So at Hazard 15 / Stress 3 you succeed on 15 or higher and Fumble on 3 or lower.

Also roll your Legend Die to represent your advantages. This allows you to upgrade your result by one step, if you can meet the criteria. (One step improves fumble to failure, failure to success, success to crit.) The Legend die faces highlight your choices as a player and various aspects of your character.



Turns
The game is played in continuous rotating turns; it's always someone's turn.

Take one Action during your turn:

Attack - inflict 1 Damage
Investigate - search, examine in detail, appraise, etc
Use Item - drink a potion, throw a rope, open/shut door
Mercy - stabilize or dispatch a mortally wounded creature
Use Secret - use a spell or special ability (pay 1 Vim)Also take two Maneuvers in your turn or at any time during the same round:

Move 10 feet - walk, sit, stand, kneel, swim, climb, etc. 
Run 20 feet - on open ground
Ready Weapon - draw sword, put away ax, draw bow, etc.
Aim - called shot
Dodge - improve defense
Cover - take cover

Combat
When your turn starts, make a Saving Throw if you are attacked by a monster or other danger this round. If you fail a dice roll you are “hit”. Take your action after your Saving Throw. If you attack and succeed on a dice roll you “hit”.

Each “hit” deals 1 Damage, +1 for a Crit or Fumble. Then compare the weapon and armor, and add +1 Damage if Weapon Class is higher, or subtract -1 Damage if Armor Class is higher. The GM can also apply a +1/-1 modifier.



If you are hit and your armor does not negate all Damage then you take a Doom. This is a life-threatening injury.

You can Soak 1 Damage each time you are hit. This raises Stress. Roleplay what you do (feel free to let your creativity run wild and take "artistic license", since this is your heroic "plot armor”).Contents
LEGENDS OF THE  DRAGON ISLES
LEGENDS OF THE DRAGON ISLES
Copyright © 2023 Paul Abrams 
Author: Paul Abrams
Contact: legendsroleplayingsystem@gmail.com
Contributors: Alek Abrams, Luka Abrams, Saxon Amdahl,  Joel Butler, Scott Campbell, Brian Pugh, Chris Wessling
Original art and maps: Paul Abrams, Alek Abrams, Joel Butler
Public domain art: Albert Robida (cover is titled "Free Fight"), Elmer Boyd Smith, H.J. Ford, Arthur Rackham, Albrecht Dürer, etc, sourced from oldbookillustrations.com
Version: 2023-05-05
All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reproduced or transmitted in any form or by any means whatsoever without express written permission from the author, except in the case of brief quotations embodied in critical articles and reviews. Please refer all pertinent questions to the publisher.Introduction
Welcome bold adventurer! Before you is the timeless mystery of the Dragon Isles, a world both reborn anew and yet ancient, with realms to explore broadly above and deeply below. The world has died and been reborn anew, countless times. What legends will you create? 
Game Design Principles
Your character should be in your own words - Your character comes from your creativity and is written entirely in your own words. Your character sheet only includes words that your character could actually say in-character. Legends avoids out-of-character constructs such as classes, ability scores, levels, etc. 

Players should roll most of the dice - Everything you attempt to do (or want to avoid happening) should be in-character, so it follows that your dice rolls should work the same way. For example, you get to roll your defenses (saving throws) instead of the GM.

No dice roll modifiers - Your success or failure relies on many intangible factors such as your character, your gear, your foes, situational details, strategy, preparation, teamwork, morale, etc. Many of these factors cannot be quantified into dice roll modifiers (e.g. +2, -2, etc). Legends has a unique new dice system that does not use dice modifiers, highlighting your words-only character and other squishy facets for success that other systems cannot.

Combat should feel authentic - Legends provides the feeling of authentic medieval combat, highlighting key details but without overcomplicating things. Legends strives to portray a balance of “heroic realism”, where the characters are heroes who are larger than normal life, but are still mortal and live in a dangerous and real world. Combat is deadly enough to make you consider all your options, but still fun. 
Emergent Play - The story starts with a situation set forth by the GM. However, the GM does not script the story, rather the story is revealed during play by your decisions as players. Play to find out what happens.

Conversational Play - I grew up playing early editions of that big roleplaying game. Back then, the way you played was more important than how your character rolled. The “old school” games were full of puzzles, and the way to avoid traps was to listen and describe where you poke and prod. As your interface to the world, the GM describes the situation. Then you and the other players have a conversation with the GM where you ask questions and negotiate possible outcomes, all using your imagination. The GM then makes a ruling of what happens. This conversation is the central focus of play.

Rulings over rules - The GM acts as the “neutral arbiter” for what happens in the game, making rulings based on good sense, the rules/guidelines of the game, fairness between players, and fun for everyone at the table. Rules exist solely as guidelines to help the GM make rulings, and help players predict what might happen.

You should have agency over your growth - You get to set your own goals for advancement and build your legend, in your own way. You gain experience as you progress along your Path. 
Getting Started
Gather 2-8 people and nominate one to be the GM (Game Master). The other players each take on the role of a character in the game world. You will need paper, pencils, and dice.

Each person needs one standard d20 and one Legend Die.
Tip: You can make a Legend Die from a d6. Just overwrite the dots with a sharpie, one letter per side: "TEACUP" to represent THEME, EFFORT, ASSET, COMBO, ULT, and PREP.
The GM might want more dice by personal preference, such as a standard d6, a hit location die, weather die, etc.The New World Above
THE WORLD IS NEWBORN, bright and beautiful, full of life and boundless potential. Young kingdoms build on the unspoiled shores of the Dragon Sea: from the strong Northmaren keeps and strongholds with their high-walls in the north to the indulgent Southmaren oases with their libraries, banks, and shrines to many gods in the warm south. As they explore wildernesses and forge kingdoms they encounter ancient ruins, Eldar, dragons, and monsters, and thus learn deeper mysteries of the ancient worlds that came before.

The Known World is a familiar medieval tapestry with human kingdoms, swords, chainmail, castles, and city-states. Eldar realms are mythical and grim renaissance fairy tales. At the time of writing the year is 882 in the current aeon.

AKKAR - The basalt and obsidian palaces of the Baal dragon lords, powerful Eldar who worship and serve noble black-scaled dragons. Their Draconian Empire once spanned the world, and remnants are still visible into the new aeon, poking above the crust like islands. 
ALGLONDOR - The holy kingdom of the Alglonds occupies the rocky river valleys in the northwest. The Alglonds are honorable, pious, and excel at building river castles and forts. Their chief fortification is the Aegis, Shield of the North, where Alglond paladins of Pyrose the Fyre Lord ward against the undead of Sepulchre to the north and the vampires of Nan-Avathar to the east. 
BELERION - A remote northern realm bordering Nan’Avathar and Hrivlyggdor, renowned for natural wonders such as floating rock formations. Pilgrims on a quest for knowledge and peace will be welcomed by wise Eldar druids and will find what they seek.
DORTHONIEN - A vast woodland coastland region Within and around these forests dwell the Dorthons, men known as elf-friends and half-elves, for these forests are a refuge of the Elves. 
THE DRAGON SEA - A vast inland ocean with waters are infamous for rocky “teeth” within a few miles of the shore, oft hidden by thick mists. Some teeth are atolls, but most are uncharted hazards. Sailors make offerings to Suul, the dragon of the mists.
THE DRUNLANDS - A dismal land of twisted forests, fens, and dragon mounds between Hrivlyggdor and Akkar, where travelers are welcomed and put to succulent use. The hateful Drunes (Dreadkin) rule this land, red-eyed troglodytic Eldar who hide from the sun in their tomb city of Drun'Carnac, or in countless dim caves and dungeon-forts in the region. Drun warbands raid human lands for slaves and skins and sacrifices to summon the Great White Wyrm who will devour the world. 
THE GOBBAH EMPIRE OF DORASH KAR - A harsh land of pits and tunnels leading to the Underworld realms of the Gobbah, cruel goblyn sea daemons who always seem to wriggle their way to the surface during each aeon. The shores are littered with sacrificial altars and temples near steps leading into the sea, to worship and summon Dagon the Voice of the Deeps or even Kha’din.
HARNENDOR - The Southmaren Empire of Harnendor covers the far south. Their golden city of Aquila is a hub of trade, learning, and Black Wizardry. The Southmarens have vast fleets and have explored much of the world, and established many secret trade routes and colonies around the Dragon Sea.
HRIVLYGGDOR - The northlands of the midnight sun are vast taiga forests and arctic tundra. Only monsters and Kith venture here.
KITANIA - A prosperous kingdom covering the fertile midlands between Alglondor to the north and extending into the Rochir Plains to the southwest. The Kitanians love freedom, horses, archery, and the sea, and revere the gods Mrmym and Lunara. They send supplies north to Alglondor. 
LYONESSE - The rocky and mist-cloaked central coast is home to the Lyonese free cities. The Lyonese people love freedom and trade have learned to be adaptable in their war-torn region. The Lothian mercenary companies are famous. Their greatest free city is Ashenrise, which sits at the end of the Wolves Teeth archipelago and is the main trading hub of the north.
NAN-AVATHAR - A grim and desolate land of volcanic ashlands and crags east of Alglondor. This is the realm of the Avathars, vampiric Eldar ruled by the thirteen Vampire Lords who serve Kurg the Winter King seek to end the aeon in an endless winter of ash and bones. Some histories indicate they have done this several times before, with each death adding to the strength of their underworld. Some Avathars labor to build dark shrines and recover lost treasures in Sepulchre, and some dream of rediscovering the ruins of the Necroalchemical Empire Of Arh'Tolth deep in the Vôkrazum jungles.
NAN-SURINEN - The southern edge of the world, filled with the warm breath of the divine winds. This is the holy land of the Alu and their feathered dragons. Foreigners are seldom welcomed.
ROCHIR PLAINS - The Rochir Plains is a vast region of arid savanna and deserts. The Rochir “horse lords” are Southmaren nomads who rule these lands, said to learn to ride and wield a blade before they walk, who value freedom above all and while claimed by Kitania, bend no knee other than to the gods Mrmym, Xohm, and Lunara.
SEPULCHRE - This legendary valley is ringed by the Wintercrown Mountains, north of Alglondor and west of Nan-Avathar. This was the oldest region of the world, cradle and paradise of first Eldar, who called this region Ealde and took refuge within a valley ringed with weirstones. Later this was the site of the legendary Battle of the Thousandfold Curses, where Eldar hosts fought the Kha’din, died, but rose as undead rather than thralls. Their graveyard extends deep into the strata of the Underworlds.The Old Worlds Below
THE WORLD HAS DIED and risen anew in an infinite cycle. Each new incarnation blossoms and grows for an aeon, then dies in an apocalypse. Every reincarnation is a land for new civilizations and dragons, built on the stones and bones of the past. Every death adds another layer to the deep strata of the Underworlds below the surface. The entire world is riddled with the bones of colossal dragons, wyrms, sunken cities, vast watery grottos, and tunnels leading above and below. 

THE UNDERWORLDS are vast subterranean gigadungeons formed by the layers of countless precursor civilizations. Survivors compete for life in the dark cold below, fighting monsters and one another in their struggle to reach the surface. Yet, treasure hunters, adventurers, and doom cults seek tunnels into the Underworlds to plunder the riches of ancient aeons. Within the depths you will find dead cities, riches, artifacts, dragon lairs, monsters, monster eggs, vast tunnels and caverns inside dead dragons, miles long tunnels filled with the millions of glistening eggs laid by chthonian horrors, trapped Eldar civilizations, standing armies forged and forgotten, imprisoned kha’din and undead horrors, entrances to Kalla, and shrines to Gods with forgotten names. As above, so below, the underworlds are a reflection of the surface world, and below are concentric circles of nested underworlds and gates between.

ELDAR are survivors of previous aeons. Once young like us, they have been forged, broken, and reforged in world-ending fire to something like fae or daemons. A few Eldar have realms above and below, but most are trapped below and seek the surface, or wander without a people or a home. Some Eldar you might encounter are angelic Elves, inventive Dwur, draconic Baal, vampiric Avathars, scaly Drisi serpent-men, evil troglodytic Drunes, stone-skinned Karrocks, dragons-laying Kith, wise Belerions, black-robed Alu, reptilian mystic Kess’rith, fiery Ifr’it, or grotesque Gobbah 

KALLA are holdfasts that allow the Eldar to survive across aeons. Each is an extra-dimensional pocket controlled by sorceries. Eldar, dragons, and wizards struggle for control of these places in a hidden magical war, yet, one that influences the rebirth cycle of the surface world. Kalla’din are Eldar extra-dimensional prisons for Kha’din and other daemonic horrors. Kalla gates are located at Nodes, which are intersections of Dragon Paths coiling around the world.

WIZARDS are abstruse sages and adepts of the magic arts. Similar to Eldar, wizards seldom appear in the world, usually secluding themselves in Kalla to focus on experiments and studies. Some form covenants of mutual assistance and defense, such as the Imperial Black Wizards in Harnendor, the Istari in Belerion, the Inverted Pyramid in Lyonesse, and House Cennyth in Kitania.

DRAGONS are bound to the cycle of the world, dying in each apocalypse and reincarnating with each aeon. Dragons are territorial, and guard their lairs to the death, from threats above and below. Some dragons have cast aside this natural cycle, living past their aeon as quasi-undead Wyrms. The Baal’Mot are draconecroalchemist priests who aided the Wyrms in this end. By living beyond their natural time the Wyrms grow to enormous size, misshapen, grotesque, cancerous, and undead. 

KHA’DIN are primordial horrors spawned in the watery darkness of the deepest, oldest layers of the Underworlds and ocean abzu. In each aeon Kha’din find for paths to migrate to the surface, and dragons struggle to hold them back. Their mournsong causes eerie dreams and impulses, and a touch of eye-covered tentacle infects with taint that spreads until the host is a Akuma thrall.

THE GODS are Pyrose the Sun King, Xohm the Earth Mother, Mrmym the Winged Messenger, Lunara the Veiled Maiden, Kurg the Winter King, and Hruul the Voice in the Void. They are known by other names across cultures and the aeons, but the archetypes are the same, for example the Baal known the Veiled Maiden as Suul. The Gods exist above the rebirth cycle of the world, and seldom leave their Hallows, instead sending Saints armored in faith. The Saints are joined in a communion or collective called a Hallow, which allows them to commune with each other and their god, but also places their souls beyond jeopardy. Thus, saints are fearless!

THE MAGIC ARTS of the Dragon Isles are ancient, elegant, and decadent, having been developed by various lines of Eldar across aeons. Magic spells, rituals, runes, enchantments, and the like are all Secrets that you can learn, and should guard closely.
GULDURINE GLYPYHS are unsettling ancient symbols sometimes found inscribed on ruins buried deep in the past, or submerged under the seas. Glyphs command abstruse concepts rather than natural phenomenon, such as summoning, binding, unseen forces, teleportation, and other mysteries. Glyphs are used by the Black Wizards of Aquila, Avathars, Gobbah, and Guldurine Alu.
THAUMATURGICAL RUNES are the building blocks of creation, and securely held by the Dwur. There is a rune for every foundational truth of nature, such as "fire", "mountain", or "tree". Runes are most often used by Dwur, Thaumaturgists, and White Wizards.
ALCHEMICAL ARTS are magical processes which can create substances not naturally found in the world, such as magic potions, special alloys, alchemist's fire, hardened glass or stone, and many other wondrous materials. Notable alchemists are the Baal'Yr, Drisi'Yr, Avathars, and Black Wizards of Aquila.
MTHU RYGAS are sorceries built by forming mental images and constructs and holding them together by force of will and and spirit. No words or gestures are used, but the sorcerer must concentrate, and must see the target directly with his own eyes, for the eyes are the gateway to the soul. Known practitioners of sorcery are the Belerions, Black Wizards of Aquila, and Ifr'it.
ASTRAL HARMONICS are eerie sounds, intonations, or songs drawing magic from the Astral. Aethiiri melodic strings and voices weave beautiful eerie music, Alu bells, song bowls, and chants direct deep meditation, Baal horns and brass instruments echo dragonsong, and Kha'din create dark whalesong dirge.
Secrets of the Dragon Isles
The following is unknown to most living people, only hinted at in songs and histories. Learned men such as monks, sages, wizards, and Eldar may hold scraps and clues to these great mysteries, but only those who delve deep under the surface of the world can have any true understanding.
The Young Kingdoms
The Eldar know that the young kingdoms of men which have sprung up in the recent years bears a striking resemblance to kingdoms in prior aeons. The names and locations of nations and cities are the same, or very similar, as the youngest new aeon plays out. Only the wisest Eldar know the Kalla below influence the Regio above. This is the secret of the Eldar, shaping the newborn lands again to the vision they had in their eons long ago.
The Surface World
The young kingdoms of men have blossomed on the surface of the world, but this is a paper-thin veneer even more superficial than the tip of an iceberg. The surface marches through seasons of the year as well as a countdown towards the end of the current aeon, which will end with a worldwide cataclysmic apocalypse, adding one more layer to the world and beginning the rebirth cycle.
The Underworlds
The entire world is riddled with the bones of colossal dragons, wyrms, and great cities of lost empires. Lands once above are now below, and bones of aquatic cities have been washed up on the shores. Entire civilizations have been covered over by layers of history, sometimes buried alive and furiously tunneling up toward the surface...or below in search of even more ancient treasures. The tangled warren of countless tunnels and layers is an endless gigadungeon crossing back and forth, up and down, over the entire world.
Strata (Layers)
However, the surface is just a thin veneer. The world beneath is endless strata (layers) of buried civilizations. The entire world has died a thousand times, with each apocalypse adding new layers to the strata, forming a stratigraphic sequence of megadungeons and gigadungeons, like the classic “circles of hells”, part Tartarus, part Jules Verne, part "dying earth” of Jack Vance.

Some layers contain world-spanning cities, dungeon levels, evil (or good) empires, fossilized remains of mountainous dragons, bore-holes of cyclopean wyrms, shells of immense ammonites, nations of undead trapped for all time, or pure clean ash. Some layers are repeated, as if the ancients repeated past mistakes.

Only the surface and the few layers just beneath are understood or remembered at all. The stratum also varies in depth and even order depending on where you descend. Thus do the strata differ from the classic “circles of hells”, for they are not sequential nor directly connected or organized. This world is not a static place, but ever-changing both over time and where you explore. Truth is lost in the mists of time, but some strata might have been:

Ruins of the Draconian Empire of the Baal
Mass Crypts of the First through Fifth Vampire Wars
Ruins of the Serpent Empire of the Drisi and Nisi
Ruins of the Dracoalchemical Empire of Ahr’Tolth
Cyclopean fossils of dragons and ammonites
Toxic Jungles of Vôkrazum and giant insects
Decadent treasure halls of the Harvesters
Great Gobbah Empire, ever tunneling upward
Troglodytic cities of the Draugr, Drunes, and Dreadkin
Endless graves of the Battle Plain of Sepulcher
Legions of undead elves seeking the surface
The Undying Lands of Ealde
Rhi'Annon, the endless dungeon of graves
The Gigaglacial Age
Battle ruins of the hosts of Dagour Dagorauth
Layers of only ash, debris, and fragments of the moons
Hollow earths and lost worlds, buried and preserved in time
The deep waters of the Abzu
Kalla
Most Eldar survived the end of their eon and subsequent apocalypses by constructing Kalla, magical realms that exist outside space and time. Access is made via ancient Kalla gates found scattered across the surface and deep Strata. Despite their precautions these civilizations usually die in time, decaying from within or falling to ancient rivals. Many adventures can be had within these mythical places.
Part 1: Ancestry
The following set of character “ancestries” are recommended choices for your character represent distinctive and dominant cooperative cultures in the present time. 

You are recommended to choose one of them. This provides you with a ready-made distinctive “look” and cultural heritage that fits into the campaign setting, and keeps it simple for other players to understand and relate to you. 

However, if you have a creative idea of your own then feel free to discuss it with the GM. Some players have created truly unique characters such as a “winter wolf” or “baby platinum dragon”. This can be a very challenging roleplaying experience. If you choose to do this then you are recommended to create close tie-ins to at least one other character to help you integrate with the fantasy world.
Northmarens
Northmarens are widely varied peoples from river and sea-side kingdoms on the northwestern shores of the Dragon Sea, such as Alglondor, Dorthonien, and Lyonesse. They are young and impetuous and eager for glory in battle, conquest, exploration and trade, however they are not as advanced as their smaller southern cousins, the Southmarens. They are divided into countless kingdoms and free cities, such as Alglondor, Dorthonien, Belerion, and Lyonesse, but stand united against the threat of bloodthirsty Nan-Avathar. They are allies with Eldar such as of Elves, Belerions and Dwür, and plagued by foes such as the Avathars and Illythrhi.

Northmarens are a diverse lot, and customs vary between regions, since most never leave their home town. A typical Northmaren stands six feet tall, a full head taller than their smaller Southmaren cousins, and some of their larger men are seven feet tall. Some tend towards single-mindedness and perfectionism, like the Dwür who taught them the arts of stone and steel. Yet others love nature, forests and the sea, like the Elves who taught them the arts of archery, swordsmanship, wood lore, and prayer. Most Northmarens have a profound sense of fear and distrust for magic, especially Avathar blood magic or necromancy, except for obviously Elven "hallowed" magic such as songs to Lunara. Witches and vampires are hunted and cleansed with holy fyres of Pyrose.

Northmaren strongholds are works of engineering that would make the Dwur proud. The most famed is the city-fortress of Alglondor, the "Silverplume".

Northmaren Names: Alrik, Godfred, Bjarieson, Gunnar, Ognin, Thorkell, Ulf, Ragnar, Thorir, Leikrison, Knut, Sigrid, Saxe, Hallki, Geirla, Idin, Leif, Sigfi Horgi Iwar Asbralson Scandlo Odik Sturlison Ognin Thorki Bjarieson Hrike Agingrson Tholmfi Alldolfr Axir Herison Orken Fasti Artmav Saxe Geirla Idin Leido Artlidson Edil Mundi Leikrison Hugi Horhi Arnkend Axek Hallki Berdi Mundi Summi Gudmi Arar Knute Sokki Loomis.  Homelands: Alglondor, Lyonesse, Dorthonien, Belerion.  Themes: Alglond, Dorthon, Taurithren Ranger, Druid, Elf Friend, Arms Master, Hallow, Knight, Noble Born, Paladin, Herald. Traits: hard to kill, strong, archery, swordsmanship, spearman, honorable, courageous, heraldry, music, scouting, bowyer/fletcher, bushcraft, wood lore. Assets: cuirass, plate armor, sword, lance, poleax, longsword, rondel, warhorse, canoe, silk rope, Elven cloak, hunting bow, long bow, war bow, bread, cheese, Elven way bread. SECRETS: detect evil, sense truth, holy aura, Elfsight, Starlight, Blessing of Lunara, Healing of Lunara, Purify water, Find Path, horse whisperer. Dark Secrets: family slain by Avathars, impious, deserter, fears undead. Paths: battle the Avathars, earn knight's armor, become a knight, build a river fort, strengthen the forest, purify forest tainted by Avathars. hunt Avathars, win new lands in the southSouthmarens
Southmarens are the sophisticated citizens of the seafaring cities of Aquila and the Empire of Harnendor. They are ambitious merchants and adventurous scoundrels with a famous wanderlust and are thus found everywhere, recognizable as slightly smaller, swarthier, and more calculating than Northmarens, with fast hands and a ready smile. They are true rogues who rely on their exceptional luck, opportunism, quick wits, sharp blade, and even sharper quips. The center of their world is Aquila, the infamous "City of Thieves" and seat of their golden Southmaren Empire of Harnendor, with its decadent aristocratic society, dreaming artists, clever thieves, silver-tongued merchants, and scheming black wizards. Their empire extends as far north as Kitania, surrounding majestic Madrigal, "City of Birds". Southmarens are famed for their ships, horses, skill in arms, and the sense of style they bring to all they do.

The Southmaren Empire covers the Dragon Sea, with many hidden trade routes, ports, cities, and lands on its shores, such as Kitania, the Rochir Plains, Dagor, sorcerous cities the Sea of Fallen Stars, the deserts of Haradjiia, and the southern Emerald Isles. As a result, the Southmarens are a varied people, a melange of cultures of Aquilans, Kitanians, Rochir, Northmaren immigrants, and Haradjiin. Southmarens have intermittent alliances and wars with the ever changing Northmaren kingdoms, hampered by their propensity to raid the rich Southmaren lands. They are also neighbors of Eldar such as the Mirjiador Alu, Baal of Akkar, Guldurine Alu, Haradjinn Alu, and know how to appease and trade with them, but are bitter enemies of the Gobbah and Drisi.

Southmaren nobles are most often found in the major cities of Aquila and Madrigal. Nobles are expected by society to have skill in business, in feats of arms, as well as athletics, music, dancing, and other arts. All must  be done with sprezzatura, the air of nonchalance of doing many things well with little effort or concern.
Southmaren Names: Marozzo, Faxx, Hristo, Elo, Rendo, Pulg, Thorkell, Talin, Thaxas, Thax, Pax, Falar, Thorkar, Basharat, Killian, Tia, Mira, Alya, Avaxa, Ava, Vlasha, Vlana, Thorkell, Talin, Fay, Thaxas, Jakartai, Than, Pax, Thoren, Thorin, Falkar, Thorkar, Avar, Pulgh, Basharat, Giovanni, Rezz, Seco, Ansus, Sabe, Rento, Tiusio, Garso, Mundi, Anez, Veno, Zaido, Guiro, Arin, Ruenzo, Vadi, Garceo, Rila, Duso, Luadio, Miro, Cuso, Reiala, Tero, Sesme, Video, Nando, Andos, Mara, Cemia, Sesa, Aurol, Sendia, Female:, Killian, Thraxa, Talya, Thorka, Thorlia, Avaxa, Ava, Vlana, Vlasha, Eildinda, Gila, Berta, Gelvan, Vico, Viso, Ardon, Valdo, Mundo, Afin, Crono, Alid, Lupe, Faxx, Thaxas, Brax.  Homelands: Aquila, Madrigal, Kitania, Dagor, Tuln, Guldur, the Emerald Isles. Themes: Southmaren, Harn, Aquilan, Rochir, thief, adventurer, swashbuckler, city merchant, banker, traveling merchant, mercenary captain, ship captain, Black Wizard, priest, Aristocrat, thief, assassin, slave trader, ranger, traveler, scout, nomad. Traits: sophisticated, streetwise, agile, quick, lucky, savvy, appraisal, artistic, witty, jaded, swordsmanship, traveling, riding, survival, desert survival, bushcraft. Assets: cuirass, sidesword, buckler, parrying dagger, storta, spadone, partisan, crossbow, boots, guildmaster silver pin, spellbook, vial of poison, vial of poison antidote, deer meat, wineskin, traveling rations. Secrets: black wizard spells, lock picking, magic appraisal, forgery, bribery, sword tricks, riding tricks, archery stick shot, horse whisperer, poison/antidote brewing. Dark Secrets: owes a debt, liar, thief, blackmailed, gigolo, flat broke, lost soul. Paths: find a magical rapier, learn black wizard spells, make it rich, pay off debt, blood debt vs goblyns, soul owned by a black wizard, orphan, raised by slave traders

Æthiiri (Elves)
The Aethiiri (Elves) are beautiful hallowed Eldar of light, filled with sacred magic of the stars, moons. and music. Most Elves manifest aspects of the gods Lunara and Hirminel to the extent that being “Hallow” is often confused with being Elven, and some Elves have a visible silver halo. Elves are extraordinarily perceptive, and can see, feel, and find things invisible to mortal eyes. When they find people who are pure of heart they name them “Elf-friends”, and help them follow their call to become hallow servants of light. However, when Elves find hidden darkness they purge it with silver arrow and flaming sword, just as they have always confronted evil across the aeons, such as Kha'din daemons, Deurg'gul undead of Sepulcher, fallen "dark" Elves, and fallen Wyrms. As a result, Elves traveling in the young kingdoms are met with mixed feelings of awe, wonder, and fear that they might find an imperfection in mortal hearts. This fear means some kingdoms do not welcome them at all.

Elven Names: Aegnor, Aerandir, Anarion, Anar, Annael, Aradan, Aranwe, Elros, Eluchil, Lenwe, Maglor, Aerin, Diora, Luthien, Morwen, Ilmare, Laurelin, Niniel, Rian.   Surnames: Meadowbrook, Moonshadow, Blackthorn, Whitefeather, Harplight.  Themes: Elf, Ælf, Hallow, Saint, Ranger, White Wizard, Bladesinger, Battlesinger.  Traits: lithe, quick, beautiful, holy, light, moonlight, blessed of Lunara. Assets: sword, bow, knife, spear, leaf armor, Elven cloak, silver trumpet, mandolin, harp, holy water, way bread.  Secrets: starlight, moonlight, healing touch, holy water, water of visions.  Dark Secrets: vow of vengeance against the dark elves, family slain by Kha'din.  Paths: root out evil in the young kingdoms, find a weirstone of Lunara, learn a new song, bring a new saint to Lunara
Illythrhi (Dark Elves)
Elves who turn away from the light of the Menelion are referred to as Illythiri, or “dark elves”. Lost from the light, they are unhallowed saints of dark gods. Hyakki has her “forest witches of the hunt” and Reshuk has his undead “Deurg-gul” of Sepulcher.Alu
The sight of a masked Alu is enough to clear a busy street in any city. While similar in size to a Southmaren, the distinctive demon mask, robes, curved swords, hooks, and chains they carry mark them as "Alu Demons", Eldar shadow warriors and deadly from the underworlds. Only arrogant fools stare at their swords or meet their their red-gold eyes, for these are challenges to duel, and once drawn a hungry Alu blade must taste blood and souls before it may be sheathed.

Alu are famous duelists and swordsmen, known for being particularly devious adversaries with many secret and deceptive techniques. They wield distinctive curved and hooked swords of varying designs and lengths. The long edge is curved and ideal for broad sweeping cuts. Often weapons have hooks, lugs, chains, or cords for ensnaring and tripping. Such weapons are often of distinctive cultural design and use Eldar materials such as moonsilver, night iron, and bladegrass. Alu who always stand ready to fight are known as the Alu'Kel, and take that honorific after their name, such as "Arar’Kel".

Alu traditionally hide their faces, either behind a hood, veil, or war mask, leaving only their red-gold eyes visible. Their war masks are terrifying, formed in the stylized visage of various "Gallu", which is the word Alu use to describe the various demons of the underworlds, such as Oni, Ifr'it, Djinn, Tengu, Naga, Kha'din and all too many others. The Gallu visage is artistically embellished with elements of nature, spirits, and weapons. Alu masks are reputed to have magic powers, such as hiding the wearer from demons, shapeshifting into a demon, or ward pacts with bound demons.

Secretly, as one of the oldest of the Eldar, the Alu see it as one of their sacred duties to hunt, bind, and imprison wandering demons ("Gallu") across the Dragon Isles. This ranges from minor monsters and spirits to major incursions that threaten the world, such as the Kha'din. To this end, Alu use various binding chains, hooks, and mystic rituals to ensnare and imprison demons into Kalla'din planar prisons. Indeed, many of the Alu ruins found across the Dragon Isles are prisons, best left unopened. Alu entrusted with this sacred duty are the Alu'Shem, and use that honorific after their name, such as "Ammon'Shem". Some are reputed to call upon bound powers in times of need, and may undergo transformations to take a Gallu visage or feature such as tengu wings or oni strength. Alu choose their words with care, for they know hidden power of words to bind, and true words are magically binding.

Alu Names: Ammon'Shem, Arar’Kel, Panur'Shem, Sago'Shem, Azzaz'Kel, Verash'Kel, Ara'Kel, Nina'Kel, Vera'Shem, Nezzera'Kel, Nim'Kel, Ran'Kel the Ghost Blade, Dim'Shem Binder of Gallu. Homelands: Nan-Suruinen, Haradjiia Themes: Alu, Alu Demon, Alu’Kel, assassin, Ifr'it, Haradjinn, Kha'din hunter, ninja, kensai, sohei shadow warrior, duellist, demon binder, tengu.  Traits: quick, light, agile, swift, agile, small, cunning, cruel, perceptive, clever, tumbling, leaping, rolling, parry, dodge, stealth, rope use, trapping, binding, climbing, water walking.  Assets: Alu demon mask, Alu silk robes, Alu bladegrass armor, Alu curved longsword (e.g. katana, scimitar, falchion, shotel), throwing dart knives (e.g. kunai, trumbash), hooked blades (e.g. sickle, kusari-gama, kama, khopesh, trumbash), bladegrass whip, night iron mail, hunting bow, longbow, silk slippers, horse, falcon, saffron, lamb, rice balls, sake bottle. Secrets: arrow cutting, leaping, shadow step, invisibility, illusion, mirror image, shadow image, hide in shadows, shadow mask, binding words, circle of binding, binding chains, oni strength, tengu wings (grow from the back), shapeshift to Gallu.  Dark Secrets: clan outcast, sole survivor, vengeful, consorts with shadows, assassin.  Paths: defeat an Akuma in single combat, hunt Kha'din and purge them, master a disguise, master the flute, recover an ancient sword, recover a demon maskAvathars
Avathars are a beautiful, dark, and deadly people feared the world over for their sinister schemes and cruelty. They tend to be tall and thin, stronger than they look, with supernatural grace, much like Elves. The unholy truth is they are Eldar demi-vampires with stolen Elven blood. 

Do not enter the ash-cloaked lands of Nan-Avathar lightly and do not die there…

Avathars are often born the color of death, with pallid skin and white hair. Bright sunlight will blind or even scorch them like flame. The Avathar fashion dictates dramatic, flowing, cowled robes, and high-collared cloaks to protect from the searing sun and veil the wearer from sight. Even in the ashlands they need protection from the choking ash clouds and noxious gases spewed from volcanoes. Their mineral-rich volcanic land produces many colorful dyes, and while charcoal is the most practical hue the more wealthy Avathars dress with splendor. They wear riches from years of conquest, and supple fabrics like fine wool and velvet are richly embroidered in gothic designs, with threads of silver, gold, and previous stones. Even ebon-colored adamant can be given color and patterns by the introduction of various minerals in the fires of the forge.

Nan-Avathar is the domain of the Vampire Lords, a council of ancient necromancers, liches, and vampires, each immensely powerful in the arcane arts and aeons old. Avathars serve the Vampire Lords with great zeal, for these unholy half-dead have led the Avathars to world domination in the Vampire Wars of aeons past. The dead are by rights property of the Vampire Lords and their vassals. Avathar society is ancient and decadent; the nobility play high-stakes games at court, scheming in the shadows to gain favor with the Vampire Lords and displace their rivals. Assassinations by bolt, blade, or poison are frequent (although meticulously regulated by the Royal Avathar Society of Slayers).

Avathars worship the Duirgurth, the Gods of Death who preside over “the many deaths”. Death is a fearful affair with the promise of a living death on the surface, or eternal torment in some layer of hellish Duirgurth underworlds. The greatest of the Gods of Death is Kurg, the god of bloody battle, and the most devout of worshipers call themselves “Kurgans" and drink the blood of their foes. Some say with great foreboding that the Vampire Lords are building inverted ziggurat temples to the Duirgurth to channel and control energies, to bring the world into an eternal night.

Avathar Names: Alan, Dani, Dmitri, Ivan, Pavel, Vlad, Vristo, Vladmir, Vela, Trina, Vlina, Jara, Natasha, Sonja, Anna.  Surnames: Tepsh, Snagov, Cragov, Drakh, Split, Hvar, Riva. Themes: Avathar, Unhallow, Noble, Demi-Vampire, Assassin, Executioner, Kurgan, Necromancer, Undying, Necroalchemist (Royal Avathar Guild of Alchemists), Slayer (Royal Avathar Society of Slayers), Scourge (Royal Avathar Society of Scourges). Traits: strong, beautiful, graceful,, dark, uhholy, sinister, scheming, ruthless, deadly cunning, cruel, patient. Assets: black cape and hat, sunglasses/sungoggles, breath mask, plague doctor mask, gothic fluted plate armor, bat-winged ax, goupillon flail, mangual triple flail, longsword, executioner’s sword, greatsword, gothic halberd, siege arbalest, pavise, blood purity potion, healing potion in syringe, poison vial, poison dagger, poison antidote, belladonna perfume (poison), syringe, black bread, blood sausage, potatoes, wineskin. Secrets: shadow sight, poison use, flail high guard, vampiricy, vampiric regeneration, vampiric immunities, bat familiar, wolf familiar, change to bat, change to wolf, energy drain, raise skeleton, raise zombie, corpse grinder, lifeblood, blood familiar, innate spells of death, negative energy channeling, headsman, blood sight, rage of Kurg, hunter of the unfaithful, immune to charm and sleep, create ash child. Dark Secrets: sunlight vulnerability, demi-vampiric (requires blood), schemer, vengeful and petty, deserter. Paths: become a necromancer, become a Vampire Lord, gather Elf blood, capture thralls, corrupt a saint.
Baal
Baal are dragon worshipers from the "Draconian Empire" of Akkar. Baal are elegant Eldar with a touch of draconic; their skin is ash-like gray or black, often with small horns, bony ridges, sharp nails, and sometimes wings. Haughty, cruel, and greedy as dragons, Baal are looked upon with fear and loathing by most people. Human life has little value in their immortal eyes, and everyone has heard tales of the age when the Draconian empire stretched from sea to sea, enslaving all those within their reach. Their rituals of dragon worship call for burnt offerings of many kinds, but the Baal burn with a deeper purpose. Baal are often confused with Drisi serpent-men, especially by Northmarens who are often hostile to Eldar.

Baal Names: Jav'Tara, Vir'Hajas, Nur'Ash, Gor'Ash, Amon’Kel, Ev’Shem, Herek’Gor, Tov Morden’Yr, Tak’Jat, Ton'Hajak, Kajas'Gor.  Themes: Baal, Dragon Lord, Pyromancer, Dragon Knight, Baal'Kel, Baal'Yr.  Traits: noble, dragon-scarred, bony skin, commanding voice, haughty, greedy, resist fire.  Assets: silk robes, ornate silk hat, fluted plate armor, flamberge sword, spear, smoked meat, water, incense, book of dragon rituals.  Secrets: speak for dragons, conjure flames, purifying flames (burns Taint), flaming sword, flame circle (ritual), immune to charm and sleep, sacrificial rites (ritual), summon dragon, dragon scales (manifests scale armor as an Innate Asset), dragon wings (grow from the back).  Dark Secrets: as greedy and cruel as any dragon, secretly a Baal'Mot.  Paths: find a dragon to serve, expand the Regio of my dragon, purge all Baal’Mot

Baal Names & Titles. The Baal believe names and titles have power, and create mystical connections through similarity, and this repeats across aeons.
Uru: A dragon, bound to guard the Node where it was hatched. Uru can be slain but do not die, they only sleep until they are reborn as a dracontia, and perhaps again as a dragon if they earn the favor of the Dragon Gods.
Baal’Seta: A Baal noble, one who bears the seta'al dragon scars that show him to have the favor of the dragons. One needs not be born as a Baal, the dragons sometimes mark foreigners. The dragons mark the face, so all can witness and none can deny their signs of favor. Causes distrust in Kith.
Baal’Shem: dragon priest, a Baal’Seta who solely lives to serve the dragons, perform their sacred rituals (which often involve burnt offerings). Baal’Shem are the voice of the dragons and the Dragon Gods to Baal people
Baal’Kel: knight or warrior, whose role is to be a weapon. Their name is the name of their weapon, and their weapon bears their name.
Baal’Yr: artificer, skilled in alchemy and enchantment, whose role is to create.
Baal’Na: abbot, ruler of a monastery. Na’Eslin is the monastery of the abbot Baal’Na’Eslin and home of the dragon Eslin.
Baal’Rhi: king or prince, ruler of a great city. Rhi'Annon is the great city ruled by the king Baal'Rhi'Annon and guarded by the dragon Annon.
Baal’Si: duke or count, ruler of a stronghold. Si’Anwon is a stronghold ruled by lord Baal’Si’Anwon and guarded by the dragon Anwon.
Baal’Er: eyrie lord, ruler of a great watchtower. Er’Hajak is a watchtower ruled by lord Baal’Er’Hajak and guarded by the dragon Hajak.
Baal’Mot: priest of the caste [once long ago] responsible for rituals of life and death (this name has been forgotten, and speaking this name is punished with death)Drisi
The Drisi are the Eldar
"serpent-men", servants of the Gorgonae serpent gods, old enemies of mankind. Their cold-blooded empire periodically slithers from the underworlds to cover the world in coils of slavery and deceit, then cycles into dormancy, like a snake shedding and renewing its skin.

Drisi appear as Southmarens and can blend in with human society anywhere, yet they are not what they seem to be. Drisi live to serve the Gorgonae serpent gods, and receive gifts as rewards for faithful service, such as snakes for hair, fangs, claws, scales, snake head, tail, and other snake, serpent, or draconian features such as spines and even dragon wings. Accomplished Drisi have many gifts, yet, these gifts are secrets of the serpent gods, revealed only to their saints, and so Drisi serpent-men are indistinguishable from Baal and Southmarens unless they choose to reveal these gifts to the world.

The serpent gods are renowned for their wickedness, as well as their wisdom and powers of renewal, healing, and resurrection. Also known as the Gorgonae, they have been known across the aeons by a great many names, such as Tark, Hypsiglena, Yigg, Set, Ningishzida, Asclepius, Hygeia, Panacea, Aceso, Vilothuus, Yyg, and Nisi. Their necroalchemist priests traditionally took the surname "-Mot", although this fell out of favor after a great war with the Baal, who took issue with the Drisi-Mot claiming dragons were hatched from the moons and sacrificing them to the Gorgonae.

Drisi ruins are common, such as snake-carved pyramids, crypts, slave pits, and sacrificial altars to the dark serpent gods, and these places are filled with glittering treasures as well as grave peril. The Eldar serpentmen were masters of sorcery and necroalchemy, and left behind caches of potions, poisons, salves, healing unguents, and oils, most of which last indefinitely in preparation for the end times. Rarer still are Drisi libraries, housing the skins of snakes, dragons, strange beasts, Eldar, humans, and others, each of which can be read like a book to learn their story. In this regard, snakes prove superior since they shed their skins and need not be skinned.

Drisi warriors are known for their skill with the spear, javelin, partisan, and curved swords and axes. They often prefer shields over armor, since many of their heroes of legend were reputed to be encased in tough scales, gifted by the gods, as well as other weapons such as venomous snake hair. Their weapons are often made of alchemical steels, such as ever sharp black adamant, magic-soaking brassy orichalcum, or venomous purple vakaar.

Drisi Names: Amon, Ammon, Amon-Mot, Amosis, Angrboda , A'rthuun-Mot, D'irz, D'aergul, D'ras, E'rthane, Hypnalis, Imhotep, Im'Ravin-Mot, K'alaban, Khafra, K'kai, K'nren, L'lanir, Mesedsure, Moraga, Nedjem, Neferet, Rameses, R'enn, R'leth, Set ("man of Seth"), Tahemet, Y'quis, Y'sis.  Homelands: Aquila, Ashenrise, Underworlds of Valusia, Necroalchemical Empire of Ahr'Tolth, Kalla'Drisi, the Cave of Serpents, The Nameless City.  Themes: Drisi, Nisi, Nisibisi, Draconian, Serpentman, Gorgon, Linnorm, Naga, Desert Viper, Drisi-Mot, Son of Hecate, Son of Hypsiglena, Necroalchemist, Draconecroalchemist.  Traits: serpentine, scales, serpent speed, cold eyes, snakes for hair, snake tail, devious, adaptable, beguiling, calculating patient, planner, mastermind, deceptive.  Assets: dory (light spear), aspis (shield), dagger, khopesh (sickle sword), crescent moon ax, crescent moon spade, gada (mace), monk spade, pilose (conical helm), orichalcum aspis, orichalcum pilose, adamant dory, orichalcum khopesh, vakaar dagger.  Secrets: charm person, charm snakes, sticks to snakes, spray poison, suggestion.  Drisi Gifts: Take an Innate Asset for each of your "gifts", e.g. serpent scale armor, dragon scale armor, snakes for hair, poison bite, poison blood, heat vision (q.v. pit viper), sleep venom, etc. Also take a "Drisi Gifts" Secret; when used this manifests your gifts, making them available to use as well as visible. Otherwise you appear human, and your gifts are unavailable to use, as well as undetectable.  Dark Secrets: disguised serpentman, owes sacrifices to Set.  Paths: become a son of Set, build a cult of Set, summon the Yellow King, summon an avatar of Vilothuus, find a lost bowl of Hygeia or staff of Asclepius, find a great library, subvert a human kingdomDwür (Dwarves)
Dwür are often described as dwarves or gnomes, short of stature, wizened and with dour yet hearty demeanor. They love places and things which are beautifully and well-made, so they tend to live in large cities, where they often achieve renown as masterful builders and artisans.

Even Dwur who wander afar from the forge are sure to carry tools to tinker and fix gear. Also they will strapped with guns. Multiple guns. Dwur love guns, and why not! Are they not the pinnacle of engineering and beauty? When the gods made the Dwur they challenged them to create something even greater: guns. (Some say guns are tied with beer.) Since the best guns are magic guns, the Dwur engrave their Runeguns with thaumaturgic runes.

Names: Athan, Davon, Durgir, Rugrir, Runon, Thovil, Bador, Adiel, Rura, Runa.  Homelands: Aegis, Aquila, Ashenrise, Alglondor, Belerion, Lyonesse  Themes: Dwur, Dwarf, Dwarrow, Thaumaturge, Runemaster, Gunner, Artillery Captain, Rifleman, Gunsmith, Builder, Craftsman, Brewmaster.  Traits: dour, solid, vengeful, hearty, patient as stone, strong as stone, beardy, beer lover.  Assets: hammer, axe, skullcap, three-quarter plate armor, tinkering tools, crafting tools, lantern, flintlock pistol, flintlock rifle, blunderbuss, runelock, sausages, beer, whiskey.  Secrets: Runelock, create golem, craft Dwurstone.  Dark Secrets: family slain by Gobbah, quest of vengeance.  Paths: invent something new, craft a new gun, visit a new young kingdom, regain the old Dwur homelands in Forandol mountains.

Dwur History
Dwur history is the history of Dragon Isles. Their homelands are deep in the Forandol mountains in the north, where they spent aeons carving the mountain peaks into breathtaking halls. Their bright halls were filled with wondrous works, given life by Dwur thaumaturgic runes. This was aeons ago, and they fled during The Breaking, scattering to the winds.

Many Dwur joined the Baal in their sacred quest to reclaim the Dragon Isles from the Kha’din. The Dwur built roads and canals connecting the Dragon Isles, overlooked by watchtowers and shrines. These works were made from Dwurstone, black basalt sturdily wrought and carved with thaumaturgic runes, which was even capable of giving life to the Karrocks. The Dwur also forged runeblades, dragon-winged plate armor, and dragon-mouthed thaumacannons. Many of these works survive and shape the landscape of the Dragon Isles. This alliance ended bitterly once the Baal finished their shared quest and then sought to grow their power into the Draconian Empire. The Baal-Dwur schism led to the fall of the empire, and the world is now facing Kha’din again.

Indeed, if Dwur have a fault, it is their memories. Dwur remember all, never forgive, and never forget. It can take a lifetime to earn their trust, yet, a single act of betrayal to lose it forever. They remember all the long dark wars of the past, and remain bitter enemies of the Gobbah, Drisi, Baal, and Deurg'dul undeads of Sepulcher. Some still seek vengeance to this day, but prefer to ally with Northmarens and serve as elite artillery and gunnery troops rather than foot soldiers.
Dwürgaur (Dark Dwur)
Not all Dwur seek the light. The Dwürgaur tunneled deep and away from the bright peaks. Life in the depths changed them, and now they are enemies of the Dwur and all surface dwellers. Some say they are the remnants of the Dwur who were lost in the Battle of the Thousandfold Curses, who now seek vengeance for being left behind and sealed into the abandoned Dwur halls.Karrocks
Karrocks have the appearance of classical heroic statues come to life, each a study in fine art. Indeed, they are as living works of art, with impassive gazes revealing emotions both human and inhuman at the same time.

Karrocks have a quiet wisdom, usually leading peaceful lives outdoors, often in remote mountains, seemingly unfettered by modern concerns. They tend to not place much value on physical belongings; for example tend to dress simply, which works for them to better draw attention to their classical faces and physiques. However, this serene calm is only possible because they have found the path to allow stress to live within them, not to avoid it.

Karrocks were created as war machines of the Draconian Empire. Dwur sculpted the Karrocks in heartstone and gave them life with thaumaturgical runes of power. These warriors of living stone were practically impervious to harm, proof against blades, Drisi poison, necromantic magics, and the Baalfire of renegade dragons and wyrms. They were able to tunnel and shape stone to sap strongholds or dragon caves.  After the great wars the Dwur gave the Karrocks humanity to live their lives in freedom. Their bodies became flesh and blood, but they could still wield mystical gifts of stone shaping when needed. Many sought solace in remote mountain tops far from human kingdoms, to live simple monastic lives of contemplation. However, some Karrocks seek to atone for the damage they once caused, helping and protecting the people they once crushed under stone heels. Despite this, most Karrocks hold no regret over fighting the Drisi serpent people or Wyrms.

Although Karrocks were given humanity by the Dwur and can lead mortal lives, they are Eldar who bear thaumaturgical runes of living stone. Karrocks can tap those runes to transform back to their original body of living stone. The runes also form a sympathetic connection with stone, and many Karrocks are able to wield this power to shape stone as if it were clay, or pull stone objects such as great clubs from the ground. Karrocks can use their "runes of living stone" to avoid normal human needs such as food, clothing and shelter, outlasting a famine or winter storm by turning to stone. However, these runes must be fed earth power to develop and keep their power strong, so Karrocks constantly seek out gems and precious stones containing blessings of Xohm, the Earth Mother.

Karrock Names: Athan, Davon, Durgir, Galatan, Krego, Rugrir, Runon, Thovil, Bador, Adiel, Galatea, Rura, Runa.  Homelands: Alglondor, Nan-Surinen, Sepulchre, the Platinum Peaks.  Themes: Karrock, Exemplar Saint of Xohm, Wrestler, Warrior-poet, Priest, Yamabushi, Sohei, Wanderer.  Traits: solid, hearty, wrestling, tall, huge, strong, voice like a mountain, baritone, patient as stone, stoic, tough as stone, strong as a mountain, contemplative, meditation, unyielding.  Assets: stone mace, stone maul, poleax, iron-shod staff, tetsubo, lantern, colorful cloak, monk robes, simple loincloth, sausages, beer, whiskey. Secrets: feat of strength, summon greatclub, stone shape, shape stone, earth shatter.  Karrock Gifts: Take an Innate Asset for each of your "Karrock gifts" when you are made of stone, e.g. stoneskin, stoneshirt, stonefists, etc. Also take a "Karrock Gifts" Secret; when used this manifests those Innate Assets, making them available to use as well as visible. Otherwise you appear human, and your gifts are unavailable to use, as well as undetectable.  Dark Secrets: war atrocities, recurring war nightmares.  Paths: find the Karrock homeland, find an arkenstone, become truly patient.  Karrock Paths: You can consume gems and precious stones to earn XP on Paths for Karrock Gifts. (Tip: look up reputed gemstone powers for inspiration.) For example, you might work towards gaining a "stone strength" Trait or Secret by consuming a precious stone (such as agate or black onyx). Also if you find a truly magical stone then you may be able to gain its power.Kith
The Kith are the rarest and grimmest of warriors, feared the world over for their immense strength and ferocity. Legend tells that their ancestors were Wyrmskrøl "dragonslayers", who hunted wild beasts, monsters, and dragons, then in tradition ate the hearts of their prey to gain all the qualities of the beast: bravery, strength, agility, and from dragons came healing  and immortality.

Each Kith is an alpha predator, a peerless hunter and warrior, yet seeks to outdo the feats of past great heroes and build an even greater name and legend that will last for all time.

Kith of legend often cast as musclebound berserkers half-naked in animal skins, wielding giant weapons, howling and murdering and like feral animals, and immune to wounds. Many live by the words "you keep what you kill", only owning and carrying what was pried from the grasp of vanquished foes, even going so far as to keep "drinking skulls" as trophies from especially worthy foes or prey. Kith often fasten belongings which can't be worn with cords or chains. All the myths are true, but the Kith are also Eldar, and some are just as civilized as any northmaren. Some Kith do indeed tower above even the northmen, and some have a bestial ferocity, but many others have the calm, quiet and determined demeanor of a seasoned hunter who stalks deadly monsters, yet prevails via cunning.

The ancestors of the Kith came from the far northern lands of the midnight sun, which they call Hrivlyggdor. The cold mountains, tundra, forests and rivers of the north are teeming with big game for the hunt. The weather alone can kill, heightening the challenge when hunting monsters such as cave bears, giants, dragons, wyrms, and underworld cities of Drisi and Drunes. Many Kith return to this ancient homeland as a rite of passage, seeking to test and find themselves. Yet, this land is is no longer their home, which is amongst the northmarens and southmarens who struggle against monsters, wyrms, and oppressive Eldar empires, and are in need of a hero.
 
Kith Names: Alva, Asger, Aslog, Balder, Bard, Beowulf, Bjorn, Brant, Canute, Dag, Dagmar, Egil, Eirik, Fafnir, Freja, Haldor, Halvard, Helle, Hjalmar, Inge, Ivar, Jarl, Jormunrek, Niflung, Odin, Ottir, Siggeir, Sigi, Sigurd, Sorli, Regan, Regin, Rerir, Rodingeir, Tarben, Thor, Thorsen, Thorvaldr, Thorvaldr, Thurmond, Tyr, Tyra, Unn, Vali, Volsung, Ylva.  Homelands:  Hrivlyggdor, Ashenrise, The Wolf's Maw, Belerion, Lyonesse.  Themes: Kith, Wyrmskrøl, wyrmslayer, dragonslayer, warrior, ranger, scout, berserker, monster hunter giantsbane, werewolf trapper.  Traits: hard to kill, strong, hunting, trapping, scouting, stealth, unstoppable, force of nature, resilient, axeman, swordsman, spearman, courageous, resilient, skald, bowyer, bushcraft, wood lore. Assets: greatsword, lochaber ax, dragonbone axe, saex, small ax, dragonbone dagger, war bow, war drum, cloak (esp. deer hide, wolf, bear, etc.), drinking skull, venison, grog, gold wrist band, gold torc. SECRETS: understand bird's song, dragon eyes, dragon skin, dragon awe, burning blood, burning eye, stone heart, dragon fury, strength of the wyrm.  Dark Secrets: seeks pain, only own what I can carry, keeps drinking skulls, family slain by Baal/Drunes/Drisi/Wyrms. Paths: master the winged axe, master the dragonspear, master the greatsword, slay a wyrm, slay a dragon, slay Baal, slay Drunes, raid Baal lands, establish trade with the south.Vôzen
Vôzen are doppelgängers who can take on the appearance and mannerisms of other people. Given time they can mimic the complete identity of any person. Vôzen are Eldar, and have been living this way for aeons...they could be anyone you meet, and unless you learn their "tells" you'll never know the difference.

Perfecting anything takes time, and each Vôzen develops only a few identities over their lifetime. Any given identity has a name, ancestry, face, voice, and the countless other details that make up a full, believable persona. Vôzen who travel might have different identities for each region, or parts of a city. As Eldar, they might have identities from long ago which could seem antiquated in our time, or might even have been famous people. Vôzen try to avoid their doppelgängers, since their reactions are often violent. Many Vôzen have taken action to eliminate their doppelgängers, i.e. murder them, which made their generally unsavory reputation even worse. As a result, even honest Vôzen keep their true nature secret for fear of retribution.

The unique Vôzen gifts stem from alchemy. They have alchemical blood, which provides superhuman observation and adaptation, as well as their well-known ability to change shape. In fact, some Vôzen learn to take on the shape of objects such as furniture or shrubberies instead of people. Some Vôzen have also proven able learn new abilities by studying alchemy, especially using magic potions and alchemical elixirs. For example, a Vôzen might learn to self-heal by carefully absorbing the contents of a potion of healing.

Vôzen are Eldar with ancient origins. Aeons ago, the Baal'Yr alchemists discovered the native peoples of the Vôkrazum jungles, which to everyone else is an inhospitable, toxic environment with rare and deadly alchemical compounds and fungi. The Baal'Yr were intrigued and used their alchemical arts to study, and subsequently enhance the Vôzen, creating perfect scouts, spies, and agents for the Draconian Empire. The processes used were experimental, painful, and inhuman, but ultimately resulted in what the Vôzen are today, a people transformed by alchemy with superhuman gifts. However, due to this ancestral trauma Vôzen have an innate terror of fire, and this is entirely rational since extreme heat has the potential to destabilize their alchemical composition. As a result, most Vôzen eschew fire, and even go so far as to favor bland, uncooked food.

Vôzen Names: correspond to the current identity.  Themes: Vôzen, Scout, Explorer, Spy, Alchemist, Actor, Merchant, Ambassador, Emissary, Investigator, Bodyguard, Adventurer.  Traits: adaptable, observant, disguise, linguistics, voice actor, disguise, mimicry, acting, stagecraft, ventriloquism, alchemy. Assets: sidesword, dagger, merchant's outfit, alchemists robes, master alchemist pin, potion of healing, potion of water breathing, alchemy kit.  Secrets: one secret identity, breathe water, squeeze flat, survive fall.  Identity Secrets: Each identity is a Secret. When you use the identity Secret you instantly assume that identity, and remain that way until you use a different identity Secret or want to go back to your own identity. Dark Secrets: fears fire, fears hot water, fears spicy food, fears dragons and Baal, fears helplessness/capture, murdered one of my doppelgängers, secretly a spy, always takes any potions found.  Paths: sip my potion of water breathing to learn how to breath water, overcome fear of fire, tip my potion of healing to learn how to heal myself, learn to endure spicy food, perfect next identity, go bush camping, kill off my doppelgängers, steal the identity of a noble/merchant/alchemist.  Alchemical Paths: You can sip Potions to gain XP towards Paths dealing with alchemical pursuits or powers. For example, you might work towards gaining a "strength" Trait or Secret by sipping a potion of strength. Sipping a potion lets you know what the potion does, but does not trigger any of the normal potion effects or side effects. You get XP after sipping all of the potion. You can also consume alchemical components, working towards the reputed or presumed abilities of that component. For example the "heart of a basilisk" might allow you to "resist petrification" or gain the ability to change your "stone to flesh'.Part 2: Character Creation
Your character is your interface into the fantasy game world. Legends allows any character you can imagine, so you can write about your character freely in your own words. Play who you want!

Follow these steps to create your character:

Name and Idea - What do we call you? Who are you?
Themes - Write two key concepts, such as for your ancestry (e.g. “Elf”) and background (e.g. “Soldier”).
Traits - Write the two qualities or skills that best describe you, e.g. “strong”, “patient”, “handsome”, “swordsman”, etc.
Assets - Write five common items you have, e.g. dagger, backpack, water, etc.
Signature Assets - Write two special items, such as an heirloom sword, suit of fine armor, spell book, magic flute, etc.
Secrets - Write two Secrets known only to you, such as a magic spell, ritual, language, secret technique, etc.
Dark Secret - Write one aspect of your past that you hide from others.
Experience Path - Write an important motive, goal, or quest.

Always remember that your character is yours, and always written in your own words! If you need a creative push you can roll on the tables of suggestions below, but ultimately the choice is yours.
Sample Character
Dthar Kel’en
Alu’Kel assassin and master of the nine winds

THEMES
	Alu - desert screamer
	Kel Warrior - sickle swords
TRAITS
	agile, deadly
ASSETS
	sickle swords (2)
	dart knives (2)
	water flask
SIGNATURE ASSETS
	Alu bladegrass robes
	Smoke grenades
SECRETS
	Mirrored mirages of the nine winds
	Double wind jump
DARK SECRETS
	Sole survivor of last mission
EXPERIENCE PATH
	Duel a worthy opponent

Step 1 - Name and Idea
Before you write your character, take a moment to brainstorm some ideas of who you might want to play. Also ask the GM and other players for suggestions. Go through the four sections below, either choose or roll below for suggestions, but don’t write it down yet.
i. Your Role
Think about how you want to approach problems and how that will help the group survive adventures and bring back loot. A group filling all four classic character roles has the best chance of success.


ii. Your Homeland 
Are you from the local area? If not, where are you from? 


iii. Your Background
What aspect of your past prepared you for your role in the group?

iv. Your Ancestry


Now go to the page in this book for your ancestry, where you will find a description and lots of ideas for Themes, Traits, Assets, Secrets, your name, and more. Use this as a framing for creating your character.
Step 2 - Themes
Write two Themes that describe two main concepts. Usually you should use one for your ancestry and the other for your background, e.g. “Northmaren” and “Man-at-arms”. Then add a “signature” after each Theme to customize it and make it yours, e.g.

Northmaren - from a small village in eastern Alglond
Man-at-arms - scarred veteran of the vampire wars

Write in your own words, but try to root yourself into the fantasy world. Chat with the other players to make sure they understand your concept and it fits in well with the world and the group.
Step 3 - Traits
Write two Traits, which are the personal qualities or skills that describe you best. You will use these during the game, so choose qualities that make you good at your role. Look at your ancestry page and the suggestions below. Then write in your own words.

archery
athletic
bushcraft
cooking
first aid
fisticuffs
handsome
hunting
patient
quick
riding
running
short
stoic
strong
tall
tough
wiry
witty
wrestling


Step 4 - Assets
Look at suggested equipment at your ancestry page and below. Then write 5 common Assets in your own words.

Outfit - Your basic set of clothing or armor.
1-5. doublet
6-10. gambeson
11-14. arming jack
15-17. coat of plates
18-19. mail hauberk
20. full mail

Fashion Accessories - If you take an accessory, you can describe your outfit with as much detail as you like.
bandolier
broad belt
cloak w/ pockets
codpiece
desert scarf
feather cap
fine gloves
floppy hat
front pouch
holocaust cloak
leather pants
linen clothes
mask/hood
purse, 10 sp
riding boots
satchel
slippers
starry robes
turnshoes
warm cloak

Weapons - These suggestions are grouped into pairings of weapons that work well together. Each pair consists of two Assets.
arming sword & kite shield
battle ax & round shield
bill hook & small ax
falchion & buckler
falchion & warbow
flail & kite shield
glaive & throwing ax
great club & dagger
greatsword & dagger
halberd & rondel dagger
hunting bow & hanger sword
javelins & battle ax
longbow & knightly dagger
poleax & rondel dagger
sidesword & buckler
sidesword & rotella
sidesword & targa
spear & small ax
spear & war dart
staff & knife

Expeditionary Gear
backpack / ruck
bedroll
belt pouch
caltrops
candles
canteen
cook pots 
fish hooks
iron spikes
lantern
large sack
oil cloth tarp
oil flask
rope, 50’
satchel
string / cord 
tinderbox
tent
torch
waterskin


Tools
auger / drill
bellows
bucket
canvas tarp
cart
chalk line
chisel
crowbar /pry bar
fishing rod 
grappling hook
hammer / mallet
iron spike
ladder, 9’
nails
pick
pulley & rope
pincers / pliers
saw
shovel
wheelbarrow

Theme-related gear
book
crystal ball 
flute
holy symbol 
lute / mandolin
lock picks
map case
map paper
quill & ink pot
riding horse
runestone
sail boat
signet ring
spell book
spell focus
spell component
spell scroll
spyglass
thieve’s lantern 
thieve’s tools

Food - Each food Asset is about 1 pound, enough for 1-2 days.
apples
beans
beer keg
berries / fruit
bottle of spirits
bread
cabbage
cheese
chicken
coffee
eggs
hard tack
iron rations
mutton leg
nuts
rabbit
sausages
spices
smoked meat
wineskin


Oddities - Creativity and instructions not included.
auger
bag of cats
bell
box of ticks
caltrops
dog treats
dowsing rod
feathers
glass marbles
hand mirror
hemlock
horn
jar of spiders
manacles 
mousetrap
pepper blower
sack of rats
smoke pot
tar pot
wolfsbane


Step 5 - Signature Assets
Write two Signature Assets, your most precious possessions. You might have a family sword, ancestral armor, spell book, etc.
Where is it?
First of all, you might not have the Assets on you right now. Roll 1d20 for each item to find out where it actually is. Write a Path for each Asset that you don’t have on you, e.g. “looking for my Elven sword”. This gives the GM hooks to integrate you into the campaign.


Heirlooms
You can freely describe your Signature Asset with role-playing flavor text related to your homeland or ancestry, such as "Elven leaf armor", "Elven bow", "Elven boots", "Alu Kel sword", "Dwur mail shirt", "Dwur runelock", etc. 
Enhancements
Once you acquire the Asset, roll to find out what kind of enhancement it has, and then write it in your own words. This will take the form of a Signature or Secret written on your Asset. Write your Signature Assets in your own words, and name them if you wish. Then roll to see where your Asset is. 


Connection - Write a Signature to describe a personal connection, such as “Lyon, ancestral longsword of my house”.
Fashionable - Write a Signature to make it haute couture, fashionable, rich, and noble. As long as you have a supporting Theme you will look fabulous, rock your look, get noticed, have influence, and be invited to fab parties.
Quality - Write a Signature describing an extraordinary quality, such as a sword that never needs sharpening, a lute of exceedingly sweet tone, ring with a secret compartment, etc.
Passive Ability - Write a Signature to describe something special it does all on its own. For example, a “longsword - Silverlight” that glows near undead, an “ogre belt” that makes you stronger, an “unbreakable mandolin”, etc. 
Active Ability - Write a Secret such as a magic power or special ability. You could have a magic sword that detects evil, or a flask of holy water that heals wounds. You may only use the Secret if you have a supporting Theme.
Step 6 - Secrets
Write two Secrets, such as a magic spell, secret language, or a secret master. These are things known only to you, or to a select few.

secret base
password to thieves’ guild
the thieves’ cant
ogham (language of druids)
memorized treasure map
contacts/allies
owed a favor by person x
has leverage over person y
location of a magic artifact
secret or long lost language
apprentice of an archmage
apprentice of a master thief

You may only use a Secret if you have an appropriate supporting Theme. For example, an Elf “white wizard archer” might have Secrets like Elf light, Blessing of the Elves, Elven language, etc.

Superhuman powers and magic spells are Secrets and cost Vim.

detect magic
charm person
floating disk
open
light
read languages
rope trick
magic shield
ventriloquism

Arcane Rituals allow more powerful magic and restore Vim.

runic ritual
prayer chant ritual
sacrificial altar
magic circle
faerie ring
tap node
first harvest festival
Feast of Pyrose
Feast of the Dead

Special habits or instincts can be Secrets. You always do these things even if you don’t remember to say it, but they can sometimes also get you in trouble. These cost Vim only if magic is involved.

sits with back to wall
checks the ceiling
checks for poison
always wears gloves
covers his tracks
keeps sword ready
always checks exits
light sleeper
always sets snares at camp
keeps weapons clean

You can also use a Secret to describe a special ability of your character ancestry. Otherwise you do not have the special ability. Some ancestral Secrets grant you Innate Assets when you use them, such as a Karrock’s stoneskin. These cost Vim.

Elf sense secret doors
Baal fire immunity 
Drisi poison immunity
Karrock stone shape
Karrock stone skin
Drisi scale armor

Step 7 - Dark Secret
Write one Dark Secret, which represents a hidden motive or internal conflict in your character. Their purpose is to help you roleplay your character as a real person, even though you probably don’t openly share this with anyone else.

phobia of spiders / snakes
secret identity
sole survivor of last mission
outcast / exile / deserter
old wound / phantom limb
bad bargain (owes debt?)
survived starvation
ex-smuggler / pirate
wanted outlaw / criminal
orphaned / widowed
sole survivor of plague
spy / secret identity
ancient family curse
host for something awful 
hears voices in my head
haunted by nightmares
visited by portents/dreams
have seen my own death
unnerves animals
possessed

Step 8 - Experience Path
Write one Experience Path. Paths are your essential goals, quests, missions, such as “find the cure to save the poisoned king”, “become a fire wizard”, “find a holy sword”, etc. Paths suggest who or what you might become. Walking your Path is how you “level up” your character.Part 3: Play the Game
Legends is a roleplaying game where you take on the persona of a character in a fictional world. For the duration of the game, you are your character, so everything you do should be role-played “in character”.

The GM describes the world, including everything and anyone other than the players’ characters. The GM will usually describe situations in cursory detail, and will expect you to ask lots of questions. This represents you (and thus your character) being observant and clever,  just like our favorite heroes in old stories are.

Most of the game consists of a conversation between the GM and players, where you negotiate what you do (as your character).
Rounds and Turns
The game uses Rounds so that everyone gets a chance to do something. Each person gets one turn per Round. The GM takes the first turn, followed clockwise by each of the players. This is continuous, so it’s always someone’s turn. 

The GM uses their turn to narrate the fictional world and set the scene for the PCs. As a player, your turn starts with a brief narrative transition from the GM, which can include attacks or other dangers. You must respond to any attacks or dangers by rolling Saving Throws, and may then take one Action and two Maneuvers.

Use your Action to do something significant such as attack a foe, use equipment, use a Secret, etc. Use Maneuvers to move, get a weapon ready, interact with the environment, take cover, or other small motions.
Rolling Dice
Everything you attempt to do (or want to avoid happening) should be in-character, so it follows that your dice rolls should work the same way. For example, you get to roll your defenses (saving throws) instead of the GM. Most rolls will occur within your turn.
Hazard, Stress & Vim
Hazard, Stress, and Vim are the three vital scores essential to how the game works and used in dice rolls. They rise and fall during the game, similar to dramatic tension in a book or film; you can think of them as "volume knobs" for the story. They are also shared by all players, so what you do affects others.

This game emphasizes teamwork and rewards collaboration between the players. If you want to survive then work together.
Hazard
Hazard is the current difficulty of the scene you are facing. When you roll, Hazard is the target number to succeed on your d20, so if Hazard is 15 you need to roll 15 or higher to succeed. 

Hazard is the GM's "volume knob" for tension, drama, and risk in the story. The GM will start Hazard very low (probably 10) and then slowly raise Hazard whenever describing dangerous details that make the story more risky, such as foreshadowing, describing well-prepared foes, revealing threats (especially an ambush), maneuvering enemies, or adding a detail that makes the situation more tense or dangerous. Pay attention!

As a player you need to pay attention to foreshadowing, since each new dangerous or frightening detail is possibly useful information. The GM Raise Hazards to quantify the danger for you and help you to make informed choices. Your choices matter!

claw marks on trees
big tracks/footprints
darkness falls
ominous sounds/smells
wild howling/growling
find/avoid traps
find/cross obstacle
fight sounds/yelling/screams
damage to your ship/camp
enemy leader yells orders
seeing something awful
supernatural evil/horror

Monsters - Monsters are proportionally difficult to the amount of foreshadowing, information, and fear the GM provides to heighten tension. The GM raises Hazard with each new detail, and will lower Hazard if you overcome or mitigate those dangers.
Traps - Similar to monsters, traps are more dangerous as Hazard rises. Similar to a movie, youmight find a few easily-discovered (yet deadly) traps, raising Hazard each time. 
Obstacles - You will encounter obstacles in your path, such as a rotten bridge, narrow chasm, piranha-infested river, quicksand, etc. 
Enemy Leaders - Enemy leaders can strategize and coordinate their troops or fleet, so otherwise weak underlings become more dangerous due to their leadership.

It’s important to understand that the danger of monsters and traps are mostly based on Hazard, and they do not have absolute values. Thus, the difficulty of a monster is based on the amount of foreshadowing, information, and fear the GM provides to heighten tension, as well as the GM's judgment of how challenging the situation is. So a werewolf might be much easier to defeat if Hazard is low, but very challenging after lots of foreshadowing, and similarly easier or difficult if the PCs have defeated werewolves before!

The GM will acknowledge and celebrate your triumphs over challenges by reducing Hazard, but this is more likely to happen between scenes than in the middle of combat...unless you find a clever way to reduce the difficulty of the situation! If the GM describes how vile black smokes from an unholy lanthorn are invigorating the undeads you are fighting, and Raises Hazard, then you might want to shoot that lantern to lower Hazard back down.
Hazard Range
Hazard 10-12 (low) - The players face little to no risk, they are safe. This is a good for starting a game session or a slow-paced scene.
Hazard 13-14 (medium) - The players face a good, sporting level of challenge, where they have a slight edge over their opposition, but not so much that things will feel easy. This is good for overland movement through sparsely defended enemy territory.
Hazard 15-16 (high) - The players are facing opponents who are their equal, or possibly even slightly tougher. This presents a serious challenge, and one or more of the players will probably take a serious Doom or go down. 
Hazard 17-19 (highest) - The players are outmatched, and highly likely to be defeated unless they play brilliantly or flee.
Stress
Stress is the amount of strain and trauma your group of characters has taken, and can be mental, spiritual, or physical. As Stress rises your failures are more likely to be disastrous fumbles. Stress starts at 1, then Raise Stress by 1 each time you time you Soak Damage after failing a Saving Throw, or use a Secret with negative Vim. The GM can also Raise Stress when narrating stressful events, such as when you something truly awful or your ship/castle is hit hard. When things slow down after a stressful situation, you can reduce Stress by eating, drinking, making camp, cleaning yourself, mending your gear, making jokes, playing music, complimenting others, and blowing off steam. After all, you're a person. 

You are responsible for managing Stress, and how you deal with this is part of your story. The life of an adventurer is incredibly dangerous to body and mind, routinely defying death and witnessing awful supernatural entities. These experiences, which are measured by Stress, take their toll as psychological strain which does not disappear once the direct threats have been neutralized or banished by the sunrise. You must work off your Stress and find ways to relax. What does your character do to blow off steam? 

cleaning yourself up eating & drinking
cooking meals
resting / sleeping
repair armor / gear
foraging / gathering
hunting
celebrating victory
composing music
reciting poetry
feasting
carousing

Reducing Stress is not possible within a fast and stressful situation such as combat. However, you could take a Secret which lets you reduce Stress even at the worst of times.

rallying cry
remove fear
song of hope
true leadership
boost morale
inspiring words
second wind
inspire courage
second mind
steel will
stillness of mind
war cry

Vim
Vim is the amount of energy your group of characters has available to use Secrets. Spend 1 Vim when you use a Secret. You can restore your Vim through sleep or Rituals.
Sleep
Sleeping for about 2 hours without interruption restores 1 Vim. Consecutive hours of sleep yield higher Vim. The maximum is 4 Vim, or 5 Vim if you complete all four sleep cycles in a place of comfort, such as an inn or cozy, well-laden campsite. 

Sleep is also necessary for your personal well-being, and going without sleep sets a minimum Stress.
Negative Vim
Vim drops as Secrets are used, and can go to zero or even become negative ("in the red"). If you have Negative Vim, then Raise Stress any time you use a Secret.

If your Vim is negative then it will not raise unless what you are doing (i.e. sleeping or a Ritual) earns enough Vim to set you above zero. Thus, at Vim -5 simply sleeping will not help!
Turns
Legends is a turn-based game. The GM takes the first turn, followed by you and the other players. Game play flows clockwise around the table, continuously through the game session, in or out of combat. 

Each GM turn is used to narrate the fictional world and set the scene for the PCs. The GM will raise Hazard and/or Stress when possible, by describing direct threats, revealing ambushes, surprises, ominous details, foreshadowing, and dramatic tension. Hazard is central to game play, setting the difficulty of all rolls.

Your turn starts with a brief narrative Transition from the GM, which can include attacks or other dangers. You must respond to any attacks or dangers by rolling Saving Throws, and may then take one Action and two Maneuvers.
GM Turns
The GM takes the first turn for each round. The GM narrates changes to the scene, including descriptions of what NPCs and monsters do. The GM then Transitions to the player on the left.

The GM should vividly describe what the PCs notice about the surroundings, such as “you hear the low growling of wolves in the trees”, often as foreshadowing to Raise Hazard. Players are free to ask questions as needed to understand the scene.

The GM will also raise Hazard if you attempt a course of action for which you are unprepared. For example, if you attempt to climb tall cliffs or cross an arctic desert without the proper gear, then the GM will raise Hazard.

Sometimes the GM will Raise Stress instead of Hazard.

The GM then manipulates scene elements. The GM should consider the passage of time and describe anything the PCs would observe, for example, a fire lit earlier might spread or die out, or the sounds of drums previously mentioned in the distance might be rolling nearer, creating verisimilitude. If there are monsters the GM should move them in a lifelike manner and foreshadow threats against the PCs. Otherwise the GM might use anything available, such as a monster, trap, terrain, or even the weather. Threats are only “a shadow of a threat”, meaning they are possible threats. The GM will call for actual Saving Throws during Transitions to each player’s turn.

You have two Maneuvers per round, which can be used at any time. You may freely interject your Maneuvers into the GM Maneuver phase, in which case the GM will interweave them together. For example, if the GM describes a monster moving to engage a player, you might say “I step back to keep my distance”. The GM should handle this with a fluid narrative when possible, but can pause play to settle conflicting Maneuvers as necessary.
Player Turns
As a player you get one turn per round to describe your Action and responses to the evolving story. 

Your turn starts with a Transition, a short narration by the GM to shift the spotlight onto you while keeping the game flowing. Your Transition is for you and may include critical information such as the environment as you see it, details you notice (and possibly only you), opportunities you have, or declarations of attacks against you. The GM may say things like “you see” or “(your name) sees”. The spotlight is now yours, use your moment to play your character and describe what you do in the unfolding game story. You should describe how you react to threats such as attacks, as well as what action you focus on taking, ideally interweaving them together. Think of your turn as the point of view of a camera in a film, which needs to move around to tell the story, and is focusing on you for a limited time. 

You must roll Saving Throws to defend against threats described by the GM during the Transition to your turn.

You get one Action for your turn. You also get two Maneuvers per round, which you can use at any time in the round, but now is as good a time as any if you still have them. Since you are able to judge the success or failure of your rolls, you should narrate the outcome of your Action and Saving Throw. Once you’re done with your turn, the GM will use another Transition to wrap up your turn and shift the spotlight to the next player's turn.
Resolution Order
Your Action and Saving Throws within your turn are considered simultaneous. For example, if you and a monster both attack each other, your attack and defense occur at the same time. It’s possible for you both to hit each other, regardless of which roll you make first. Both rolls are resolved as if they were rolled at the same time.

However, you can ask to resolve your Action ahead of your Saving Throw if the GM agrees your Action should happen first. For example, if an enemy rushes you and you have a spear, then your attack should occur before your foe reaches you. If you kill your foe you won’t need to make a Saving Throw against his attack.
Player Actions
As a player you get one Action per round to have your character do something important, such as making an attack, casting a spell, disarming a trap, or climbing a cliff. This is the focus of your turn.

You can attempt anything you can reasonably describe, but some of the most common Actions are:
Attack - inflict 1 Damage
Investigate - search, examine in detail, appraise, etc
Use Item - drink potion, light torch, throw rope, open/shut door
Mercy - stabilize or dispatch a mortally wounded creature
Use Secret - use a spell or special ability (costs Vim)

You will probably need to make a roll if your Action involves risk and failure could add interest to the game, such as an attack in combat.
Maneuvers
Maneuvers are minor activities such as moving, shouting orders, drawing a weapon, reloading, taking cover, etc. 

You may take your Maneuvers at any time in the round, even in the middle of the another player's (or the GM's) turn. They happen simultaneously with other Maneuvers. Unused Maneuvers are lost at the start of the next round.

Maneuvers can be used for quick observation and communication. You could glance at something, listen, gesture or point, shout a quick command or word of warning.

Maneuvers can be used for moving a few steps, sitting, standing, taking cover, etc. The normal distance moved for a Maneuver is ten (10) feet, which is typically two 1-inch squares on a tabletop grid for miniatures. Double your movement (to twenty feet) if running forward or taking advantage of the environment (e.g. moving downhill, downstream, or falling). Halve your movement (to five feet) if not walking (e.g. crawling, climbing, standing jump, swimming, etc.) You can change facing as part of any Maneuver, but are otherwise assumed to face the direction of your movement. 

step (10’)
run forward (20')
sit / kneel
stand / crouch
lay prone
crawl (5')
climb (5’)
tightrope (5’)
creep quietly (5’)
roll (5’)
slide (10’) 
fall (20’)
running jump (10’)
standing jump (5’)
swim (10’)

Maneuvers can be used to interact with items, but each Maneuver allows a single motion such as drawing a sword, an arrow, or pushing a door shut. Using an item in a way that requires multiple steps requires multiple Maneuvers or an Action.

draw weapon
reload weapon
get torch
put item away
pick item up
throw item
get potion
uncork potion
kick shut door
drop backpack
pull lever (1)
push door (1)

You can use a Maneuver to embellish your Action, adding a touch of your personal style. This is for fun and makes you look awesome.

bow/salute
hero pose
flourish/swash
swagger
laugh/jeer
smirk/sneer
quip/quote/motto
smile/grin
hiss/howl/catcall
war cry
challenge
taunt/insult
twirl/spin/flip
rude gesture
fist pump/high five
“z” slash
dance-off
theme song

Lastly, you can also use Maneuvers as combat tactics for your attacks & defenses. This is detailed in Part 4: Combat.

Your number of Maneuvers per Round is determined by your Armor Tag: Body-Armor (or none) 3, Half-Armor 2, or Full-Armor 1.

Carrying or holding onto something heavy, such as a sack of loot, body, or heavy backpack, takes 1 Maneuver. A sack of loot or backpack can hold up to 100 pounds (1000 coins), and is "heavy" if at least half-loaded.
Roll the Dice
The game is player-facing, meaning players make most of the rolls and do so in-character. (The GM seldom rolls.) The standard player roll is a simple 1d20 with no modifiers. You succeed if you roll the Hazard or higher, otherwise you fail. You Fumble if you roll Stress or below. So at Hazard 15 / Stress 3 you succeed on 15 or higher and Fumble on 3 or lower.

Also roll your Legend Die to represent your advantages. This allows you to upgrade your result by one step, if you can meet the criteria. (One step improves fumble to failure, failure to success, success to crit.) The Legend die faces highlight your choices as a player and various aspects of your character.

Crits and Fumbles are generally open-ended, with the potential for total victory or defeat.

Damage - All attacks deal 1 Damage, or 2 for Crit.
Counters - If you Crit a Saving Throw you get a Counter. This is a free Action, but limited to things you could conceivably do while defending yourself against the Saving Throw. For example you can counterattack an enemy who attacks you.
Stunts - If you roll a Crit on your Action you can attempt a heroic stunt! Describe your stunt and roll again. If your new roll is a Crit you pull off your stunt, otherwise your new roll result stacks on top. For example, if you Crit an attack you could say "I lop off the goblyn's hand!". If your new roll is a Failure or a Fumble, then you keep the results of your first Crit, but with the new consequences added on.
Natural 20 - If you roll a natural “20” you can attempt a Stunt at no risk. Ignore any result of your Stunt roll except for a Crit.
Fumbles - The GM may assign additional consequences for any Fumble you roll, such as Damage, Stress, Vim, lost, broken, or damaged equipment, etc. For example, your sword or shield might break. The GM may allow a Saving Throw if this results in severe Damage to you, or breakage to a Signature Asset.
Your Legend Die
You may also roll a Legend Die, which is a custom die (faces below) which may upgrade your natural result by one step, e.g. fumble to failure, failure to success, success to crit. Each face is a mini-game, showcasing various details of your character, situational details, and/or your skill as a player. Describe the outcome as best you can, the GM will elaborate or correct as needed.



A Theme, Trait, or Asset Signature is “ideal” for your roll if it strongly benefits what you are trying to do. For example, a Trait like “strong” could help you smite a foe or open a stuck door, or maybe even impress someone with a feat of strength, but not lock-picking.
THEME
Upgrade if you have an ideal Theme. Generally you can claim THEME if you are acting within your Themes, and cannot upgrade if you are out of your element.
EFFORT
Upgrade if you can make extra effort and have an ideal Trait to make it count.  This becomes more difficult if you cannot move freely, are hiding, are relying on impeded senses, or are hindered by a Doom or Dark Secret.

EFFORT uses Traits to represent your training, talents, and skills as well as transferability of those Traits to various situations. You might be an “swordsman”, but can you also fight while on horseback? How about in the dark? Sometimes expending extra effort is difficult to justify, such as when you are prone or in deep water. With a Trait such as “ground fighting” or “aquatic combat” then you could still upgrade on EFFORT. 

Helms make it hard to hear, so you cannot upgrade EFFORT for rolls involving listening. Closed face helms also make it hard to see, so you cannot upgrade EFFORT on rolls involving eyesight, such as shooting at a target.
ASSET
Upgrade if you have an ideal Asset Signature ideal, such as a "flaming sword" vs spiders. Some examples:

Attacking: Upgrade if your weapon has a Signature useful against your foe, such as a "holy sword" vs undead.
Defending: Upgrade if you have an Asset with a Signature that helps against this attack, such as “adamant helmet" against weapons attacking your head. The Asset must cover the Hit Location targeted by the attack.
Defending vs Magic: Upgrade if you have an Asset Signature that helps you defend against this magic, such as “orichalcum amulet" armor against hostile magic. However, if the magic is targeting a specific Hit Location then your Asset needs to specifically cover that location, such as an “orichalcum helmet”.
Climbing: Upgrade if you have a rope with a fancy Signature like "silk rope" or "elven rope”, or "climbing claws".
Picking a lock: Upgrade if you have lock picks with a Signature (which would indicate they are higher quality).
Social: Upgrade if you have elegant attire with a Signature for style, e.g. “velvet blue cape with small silver birds". You can get by with appropriate attire without a Signature for style.
Using Magic: Upgrade if you have an Asset Signature relevant to your magic, such as "wand of fire".
COMBO
Upgrade if you have an advantage, usually earned by taking Maneuvers to position yourself tactically or use Asset Tags.

Maneuver: Upgrade if you are using a Maneuver to assist your roll such when you dodge, feint, parry, etc.
Teamwork: Upgrade if an ally is assisting you with a Maneuver. For example a friend could distract a foe to assist your attack, or watch your back to assist your defense.
Advantage: Upgrade if you used a Maneuver to gain a tactical advantage like taking high ground or overwatch over a choke point.
ULT
Upgrade if you are an expert at your action, and more expert than anyone nearby.

ULT is based on the consensus of all players, so it’s dependent on your perceived character concept, role in the group, and past demonstrations of expertise. If you’re picking a lock you’ll likely win if you’re “the thief” of the group, especially if you have picked locks before no. If you’re reading archaic runes you’ll win if you’re “the wizard”. This might also be an easy win if you are using a Secret, but on a tie nobody gets the bonus, so guard your Secrets.

You should not expect to claim ULT when facing NPCs in their area of expertise. You’re unlikely to out-haggle a merchant, hide from a huntsman, or out-maneuver a courtier.
PREP
Upgrade if you can leverage an Action you took on a previous Turn to prepare for this roll.

Usually this required you to have noticed foreshadowing or clues and used your wits to make ready. Preparation is not necessarily complicated, they just require paying attention, thinking, and setting plans into motion, often simply by roleplaying what you do. For example, you might rig warning traps around your camp, or plug your ears with wax before fighting the harpies, or douse yourself with water before fighting a dragon. Your foes will do the same, whether it’s an ambush by brigands, a dragon hiding on a cave ledge, or that intricate looking magic circle the bad wizard is standing inside. The earlier and more involved Action wins on a tie.
Vision and Hearing
Seeing and hearing your surroundings are extremely important for making wise tactical choices as well as enjoying the game. 

Since much of this game is played in the “theatre of the mind’, you rely a lot on what the GM tells you. The GM will take the surroundings and your senses (primarily vision and hearing) into account when describing the situation or answering your questions. 

In most situations the GM will describe what you might see or hear in general terms, and then expect you to ask questions to get details. If you have good vision and hearing the GM is more likely to be “chatty" and volunteer extra information. On the other hand, if you can’t see or hear then you won’t receive much information at all.

Sometimes the GM will respond to a question by saying you can’t see or hear well enough to get an answer. For example, you might only be able to read an inscription if you are very close, with good direct light such as a lantern. Or you might not be able to hear what someone is saying at a distance if there is background noise, or if your allies are moving or talking.

Sometimes weather, terrain, or gear will impede your senses. It’s hard to see through trees, fog, darkness, or after a bright flash. Most helms make it hard to hear, and closed face helms make it hard to see since you are looking through tiny slits or holes.

If something is impeding your senses then the GM will provide much less information, possibly only describing the obstacle. For example, the GM might say “your helmet muffles the sound of their voices”, “you see thick smoke”, “you just hear the thundering waterfall”, “you can’t see that far away with your helmet on”. 

You cannot upgrade EFFORT if your roll relies on an impeded sense.
Light Adaptation
Given a few minutes of time, your eyes will naturally adapt to see well enough in various levels of light, from bright to dim. However, you lose your dark adaptation if you see bright light, such as the directly lit area of a light source. It’s hard to see when your vision is adapting. If you are exposed to a flash of bright light, you can make a Saving Throw to close your eyes. An eye patch can help.
Light Sources
A light source which directly illuminates an area can help you see in detail, and so the GM will provide the most detailed information. This  can be valuable when reading runes on an ancient scroll or searching for traps. A candle or lamp lights a book-sized area and a torch or lantern lights a person-sized area. However, this direct light spoils your night vision, and makes it hard to see outside of the directly illuminated area.

Light sources also provide indirect light, so in a cave or dungeon a simple candle is enough to let you see well enough to move around. You need to let your eyes adapt to the dark and avoid bright lights; since it is hard to see whenever your eyes are adjusting.

Also keep in mind light sources can be seen from very far away, and the area they illuminate allows others to see you.

Nocturnal (such as cats) or subterranean creatures (such as goblins) have sensitive eyes optimized for the dark.
Wealth, Treasure & Looting
The most common coin is the crown (cr), also known as the gold piece (gp). Some crowns are minted in other precious metals, such as "silver crowns", "red gold crowns", "platinum crowns", "electrum crowns", etc, but any "crown" is 1 gp. There are also lesser coins, such as silver pieces (sp) and copper pieces (cp), where 1 gp = 10sp = 100cp. On average 10 coins weigh 1 pound. Also if it helps, you can think of 1gp as $100 USD, 1sp as $10, and 1cp as $1.
Goods & Services
Daily needs such as food, clothing, lodging, weapons, tools, etc, are usually readily available from the local people. You can expect to pay 1gp for common goods and services of good quality. If you need to pay less you could pay in sp (or even cp), but you get what you pay for, and being cheap won't help your image. You can expect to pay 10gp+ for expensive goods and services. (The character creation section denotes expensive assets with “$".)

common (1gp): big meal, bottle of wine, lodging, cloak, cuirass, shield, knife, sword, sheet of paper, vial of ink, rope (50'), grappling hook, chain (10'), iron lock, rations (3 days), water skin, backpack, leather sack, bedroll, tent, lantern & oil, torches (4), tinder box, lock picks, mining pick and shovel, compass, wolfsbane, belladonna, holy water, eggs (dozen), crate of chickens, a goat, etc.
expensive (10gp+): full mail, plate armor, visored helm, greatsword, crossbow, pistol, book, silk rope (50'), mirror, healing potion, spyglass, draft horse and cart, riding horse, warhorse, etc.
Signature Assets
Signature Assets (e.g. adamant sword, moonsilver helm, Elven rope, a ship, a castle, etc.) are those that have a functional (i.e. non-cosmetic) Signature, Secret, or similarly valuable properties. These can only be acquired through adventuring or a Path, never purchased outright. Signature Assets can be pawned for 100gp.
Looting
Looting in its various forms involves taking an item, whether that’s from the ground, furniture, prisoner, or corpse. The way you describe your looting matters! A body might also have something hidden under its shirt, in a boot, a fake tooth, or might have gems inside. The GM will not tell you what to do, or if you missed something, that’s part of your adventure. 

Grab - Use a Maneuver to take one readily accessible item. For example, you could grab a book laying on a table.
Pickpocket - Use an Action to take a small item from someone, or plant an item. The GM may require you roll to avoid notice. This only works for easily accessible items, such as a coin purse or ring of keys on a belt hook, unless you have a Secret such as “pick pockets”.
Loot - Use an Action to loot a person or similarly-sized area, such as a prisoner, body, furniture piece, chest, pile of debris, etc. The GM will tell you what you find, and you can take one item in the Action.
Investigate / Search - Use an Action to search a person or similarly-sized area. It's up to you to say how you search. The GM will usually determine what you find based on how you describe your search (visual, patdown, or stripdown) rather than asking for a roll. Sometimes an item might be impossible to find without looking in a particular place, such as a gem rolled up in a rag in the toe of a boot.
Harvesting - Use an Action to harvest a material, such as picking mushrooms or cutting a fang off a giant spider. This can help you advance along an Experience Path.
Carrying Capacity
The game subscribes to the mantra “you keep what you kill”, so we do not concern ourselves over limiting how much of the loot you can seize and carry with you. Building long lists of weird loots you’ve delved from the stygian deeps is obscenely fun! The GM may set reasonable limits on provisions you take into an adventure (e.g. food, water, ammo, large items, etc.) to keep things feeling real, but haul out all the loot you can claim!Experience Paths
Experience Paths (“Paths”) are your driving motivations, goals, and quests. Paths can involve world-spanning quests, or they can be small and personal, such as a goal to learn a new skill or spell, craft an item, or research a new magic spell.

Lenarin wants to recover a long lost Elvish sword
Hazarak wants to find a grimoire of summoning rituals
The dragon Aashok wants the nearby goblins purged
The townsfolk need your help against raiders
Krod wants a hunting dog
Hazarak is experimenting with a “blue fireballs” spell
The princess asks for help returning to her kingdom
Druznar is attempting to summon and bind an elemental
Brigit wants to find the lost shrine of Ithilmerin

Paths are how you grow, develop, evolve your character, becoming interesting and more powerful. Completing a Path is like "leveling up", but according to your vision and in your own words.
Starting Paths
To start a new Path, simply write it down. Use your own words with as much detail as you like. You can have as many Paths as you like, and sometimes the GM will give you Paths.

Ideally use a single sheet of paper that is shared by all the players, and start each game session by reviewing Paths as a group. This transparency makes it clear what kind of game everyone wants to play, and what Paths they think will be interesting and fun. The players and GM form the audience for the heroic deeds of the characters, and can often help each other.
Completing Paths
You must earn all six “Experience Points” to complete a Path. The Experience Points match your Legend Die facets to make them easy to remember. So, to track Paths simply write “T E A C U P” alongside your Path and cross them out as you earn them. 

You can have as many Paths as you want, but you may not complete more than two (2) Paths per game session.
THEME
Roleplay progress on your Path, and describe details of one of your Themes (and/or Signature) that support the Path. For example, if you are learning a new spell then you might describe how your background as a “Black Wizard” allows you to decipher the Guildurine Glyphs of the deep old ones.
EFFORT
Roleplay how you spend effort and time training or working hard towards your Path. For example you might practice swordsmanship all day, carry logs up a mountain, or spend a day bent over musty tomes looking for a particular bit of lore.

Alternatively, roleplay how a Dark Secret or Doom moves you forward on your Path. For example, you might flee from an ambush with giant spiders, if you have a Dark Secret phobia, which helps you to learn to run fast. Or you could roleplay how a "arrow in the leg" Doom slows you down and you can’t use a Maneuver to move fast, and helped you to learn courage by standing your ground. Overcoming adversity is a path to strength.
ASSET
Obtain and use up a valuable Asset that helps you progress on your Path. For example, you might obtain special ink or paper for a new spell. The Asset must have a value of at least 100gp (e.g. a sack of 100 crowns or Signature Asset).

Tip: Look for special materials and monster parts on your adventures, such as weird glowing cave crystals, "cave squid ink", "fire beetle glands", etc. They are worth 10gp of progress each.
COMBO
Use your Path to upgrade COMBO. For example, you might roll COMBO while fighting a goblyn, and spend a Maneuver to conjure a distracting fire flash toward your “fiery circle spell” Path.
ULT
Obtain training from someone/something who is the “ultimate” at your Path. This could be a “master" (i.e. expert teacher, sensei, guild master, grandmaster, etc.), dragon, rare tome, etc. This requires at a minimum several hours (4+) of intense training and 100gp payment (or a Signature Asset). 

Or, face and overcome a Monster that is ultimate at something strongly related to your Path. For example, you could defeat a fire-breathing wyrm to finish your “fiery circle spell” Path.
PREP
Use your Path to prepare for the next round or scene. For example if you are researching “magic nodes” and see yourself approaching a node, you could briefly pause and get yourself ready to make the most of the experience. Or if you are learning a martial arts technique you might take a moment to single out and salute a worthy opponent to fight. As with gaining PREP on a roll, this takes an Action (which then gains you PREP on rolls related to your Path). To accomplish this you will need to keep your eyes open, looking for opportunities to advance on your Path.
The Creative Option
You can optionally spend time between game sessions creating something to share with your group of players. Prepare something creative, such as a backstory, adventure log, character backstory, character sketch, a miniature, sketch of your castle, details for an NPC (friend, foe, or other relationship), essay on your religion, etc. Show this to the group at the start of a session, and mark off one Experience Point. This can help a lot if you are stuck on one of your Experience Points, for example if you are adventuring in the underworlds and lack an opportunity to train under a mentor.
Rewards
The GM will give an appropriate Reward when you complete a Path. Some Rewards will add a new Trait or Secret. You could get a new Theme (up to a max of four), modify a Theme, or rid yourself of a Dark Secret. You could find or construct a new Asset, even something exotic, magic item, or summoned servant. Anything is possible if you follow your dreams, although big dreams might need more than one Path.

The Reward could be a component of your character (e.g. Theme, Trait, etc) or something less tangible like a noble title. Examples:

gold/cash/credits
letter of credit
magic spell
spellbook
healing potion
special weapon
special arrows
custom armor
armored clothes
trophy/big tooth
valuable art
trinket/gimmick
magic item
favor owed
cure for a disease
cure for a curse
land/holdings
secret base
ship/boat
musical instrument
horse/vehicle
pet/familiar
henchman/minion
resolve dark secret
location of hostage
potion ingredients
treasure map
key to something
talking book/skull
unusual tools
	
Consequences
The way you complete (or abandon) a Path matters, and may have side effects such as making allies or enemies. The GM can assign a Dark Secret if the way you took your Path had consequences.
Using Paths
Use your Paths for anything you want to accomplish. You can create personal wish lists, character objectives, personal quests, spell research, creation of magic items, finding a teacher, etc. 

You can write a Path to seek out rare items, such as a custom suit of armor, fine sword, or a spell scroll. This lets the other players and GM know the character wants that item, and lets you highlight your character’s journey to find and claim the prized possession. In this case the reward will be an Asset with an enhancement such as a Signature, Secret, or Asset Tag. If you have crafting skills you might build an item rather than buy or quest for it.

MY FATHER’S SWORD - The creepy cultists in the mountain stole my father’s sword, all I have left of the great man. I will reclaim it to save my honor.

CLOAK OF BLADES - I’m crafting a magic cloak with swords and daggers incorporated into the cloth and hem. This cloak is used like a shield.
Journeys
Sometimes a Path is just one step in a longer journey, of many Paths. If your dream goal is to become a king, an archmage, a guild master thief, then you will need to complete multiple Paths along the way. The GM may require you to split a Path into multiple Paths. 
Magic Research
Use a Path to research a new spell, construct a magic item, or other kinds of magic research. This might involve obtaining and reading arcane books, acquiring rare materials, spending time conducting magical research in a laboratory, etc.
Books of Secrets
Books contain knowledge, and knowledge is power. Ancient tomes, scrolls, maps, and spellbooks may contain Secrets such as spells or the location of an ancient lost city or treasure trove. Books are tremendously beneficial because they free you from having to travel to find knowledge. Write a Path for each topic you are studying. The GM determines how many Secrets each book contains. 
Minions
Use a Path to find a loyal minion, henchman, companion, or servant, including a magical minion such as an elemental or familiar. Write a Secret describing why your minion is truly loyal, whether that is from admiration, an oath, or magical binding. Your minion is an NPC ("non-player character") controlled by the GM, although you can generally ask (or order) your minion to do things and can temporarily take over a minion as your PC if your main character is indisposed. 

Create the minion using the standard character creation rules. If you are short on time then you can rely on dice rolls instead of choosing, and skip some steps and do them later.
Familiars
A familiar is a spirit who accompanies you in order to assist you in using your magic. Each familiar takes on the form of a tiny animal such as a cat, bat, small dog, toad, etc. Each familiar is a minion: use the Theme & Signature for the familiar form (e.g. "black cat familiar") and Traits to describe physical qualities or ways the familiar assists you with magic. Use your Secret that describes why your familiar (Minion) is loyal to describe a mystical bond with you, such as "telepathic bond", "shared emotions", "shared sight", "shared dreams", "shared voice", etc.

Familiars are relatively weak and likely to be killed if exposed to harm, however since they are spirits they can be brought back to life. You must use a Path to bring your familiar back from the dead, which manifests a new animal body (not necessarily the same kind as before). When this happens update your familiar's Theme & Signature as needed, and assign a new Trait or Secret.Part 4: Combat
This section deals with exciting topics like slaying foes and monsters and staying alive. All of this is from your point of view. You will make all the rolls in combat, both for attack and defense.
Weapons
You need a weapon to engage in combat. The GM will raise Hazard or Stress if combat starts and you do not have a weapon in hand and ready to use. Readying a weapon requires 1 Maneuver, which gets your weapon in hand and in the right way so it can be immediately used (e.g. not in the wrong hand, not upside down, etc). Always have a weapon in hand, even if it's just a stick or stone. Additional details are below.

Sidearms - Swords and daggers worn on your belt are popular because they are convenient quick to deploy, requiring 1 Maneuver to ready or sheathe. Describe how you carry your sidearms so they are Quick Assets, otherwise you need to use an extra 1 Maneuver.
Battlefield Weapons - Large battlefield weapons such as spears, halberds, greatswords, are carried in your hands on your way to the battle. You are assumed to carry them casually, so you still need to spend 1 Maneuver to Ready them. You’ll probably only carry one large weapon. These weapons are long and bulky and do not have sheaths or any convenient way to stow them. So, if you do anything that requires both hands (e.g. climbing a rope, playing a mandolin, etc.) then you are automatically considered to put the weapon down and pick it back up afterwards. However, in combat, picking the weapon back up costs 1 Maneuver, plus 1 maneuver to get the weapon Ready to use again. You may need to find solutions for situations like climbing a rope, using at least 2 Maneuvers.
Bows -  Your bow is considered Ready if you have the bow in hand with an arrow knocked. Getting your bow is one Maneuver and knocking an arrow is a second Maneuver. However, drawing the bow is part of your attack Action—you don’t hold your bow drawn.
Crossbows and Guns - Require an Action to reload. Crossbows and guns become do not stay loaded if you put the weapon down, as the ammo will get out of place or even fall out. If you are using Advanced Assets then you can use Maneuvers instead of an Action.
Track Ammunition - You must track all ammunition (e.g. arrows, javelins, throwing knives, etc.) you carry and mark off shots. 
Legality - Weapons of Class 3+ are considered “military weapons” and not legal to carry in most towns or guarded areas. So it’s a good idea to have a smaller sidearm to carry in town.
Improvised Weapons - Improvised or cheaply made weapons are Weapon Class 1 and will break on EFFORT (this still deals Damage on a hit). Makeshift items (e.g. shovel, bottle, fire poker, candlestick, stool, chair, stick, rock, brick, roof tile, etc.) can be interesting tactical options even if you have other weapons to choose from. Readying a shovel or a bottle appears less threatening than drawing a sword, and throwing bricks from a rooftop doesn’t use your ammunition or leave evidence behind.Attacks
When you attack you must roll the dice. If you succeed on your roll you “hit” your target and deal Damage, otherwise you fail and “miss”.
Failed Attacks
Failed attacks “miss” and deal no Damage, with no side effects. However, if you Fumble an attack Action the GM will describe a natural consequence or take a Counter Action, which can possibly turn your attack against you. If you use large-scale attacks like grenades or fireball spells, you can blow yourself up, and your allies too. Consider the scope of your actions, and the risk they bring.
Successful Attacks
On a successful attack, the GM will tally a Hit and then declare the Damage dealt (i.e. by comparing WC and AC) and the resulting Doom Stage. The GM may also declare that the foe Soaks Damage. The result is one of the following five outcomes:

No Doom - The target's armor or Soak stopped all Damage.

Doom1 - The target has a visible injury, but it is non-hindering. Most foes will consider retreat if outnumbered.

Doom2 - The target has a severe injury. If the Hit Location is a limb (i.e. Arm, Hand, Leg) it is disabled and cannot be used at all. Foes will retreat or surrender.

Doom3 - The target is Incapacitated (see below) and likely to die.

Doom4 - The target is Incapacitated (see below) and certain to die very soon. If you rolled a Crit, feel free to describe a dramatic dismembering wound, such as losing an eye, crushing a knee, chopping off a hand, etc, but not something instantly lethal (e.g. decapitation).

Doom 5 - Immediate death. If the Hit Location is a vital area (i.e. Head, Torso, Abdomen) free to describe an immediate and dramatic killing blow, such as decapitation, chopping it in half, blowing it to bits, etc.

When you are attacked the process is the same, just in reverse. See "Saving Throws", for how that works, again from your point of view. 

The GM will tally a “Hit” for each successful attack roll you or the other players make during the fight. The GM uses this to determine whether or not your foes can Soak Damage.
Incapacitated Foes & Death Throes
If the GM says a foe is Incapacitated, it can take no Actions or Maneuvers, so it poses little threat and is expected to die on its own, in time. However, the GM rolls a random Event at the start of each turn, and it’s possible for this to grant an Action or a Maneuver to a Downed foe. Thus, a Downed foe might manage to limp off to lick its wounds, make annoying dying sounds, kick and twitch, make a leaky mess, or bite you if you get too close. 

You can spend an Action to put a Downed foe out of your misery, either dispatching the foe with a coup de grâce or finishing blow of some kind or taking a prisoner. This does not normally require a roll, but you need to describe how you do this, and sometimes the way you describe this matters. For example, you might need to use holy water or prayers to put undeads to rest, or use fire to put down a regenerating creature. The GM will not tell you what to do, that’s part of your adventure.
Saving Throws
If you are attacked by a foe or other danger you must roll for your defense. This is called a Saving Throw, which is like a roll for an Action. If you fail a Saving Throw you take Damage. The GM will describe attacks and tell you when to roll a Saving Throw, saying something like “two black-fletched orc arrows fly from the darkness, striking Talin”. Roll a Saving Throw against that fate.

Counters - If you Crit a Saving Throw you get a Counter. This is a free Action most often used to make a counterattack, which needs to be something you could conceivably do while defending yourself against the Saving Throw.
Failures - The GM may assign consequences for any failure, including Damage, Stress, Vim, or effects.

You can use a defensive Maneuver to upgrade COMBO, e.g. dodge, parry, block, duck, roll, slip, etc. Some need to be declared before a roll, such as Guard and Cover. Some Asset Tags upgrade COMBO.

Saving Throws are used for all risks to life and limb and death-defying situations, such as a trap, collapsing cliff, pit filled with snakes, or poisoned drink. If you fail the Saving Throw you take Damage, which becomes a Doom unless your armor negates it.

attacks
weapons
falling
drowning
suffocation
traps
cave-in
avalanche
poison
disease
morale
fire
cold
acid
lightning
charm
mind blasts
fear
paralysis
petrification
very large rocks

Damage
Attacks deal 1 Damage, or 2 on a Crit. This is the same whether you are attacking or defending. Damage usually represents physical wounds, but is also used for other kinds of harm.

For physical attacks, compare Armor Class (AC) and Weapon Class (WC). Add 1 Damage if the weapon outclasses the armor, or subtract 1 Damage if the armor outclasses the weapon. If armor brings the total Damage to zero, the attack has no effect. Always use the armor for the specific Hit Location.

The GM may also apply a simple +1/-1 modifier for Damage for highlighting special resistances or weaknesses of monsters. For example, non-silvered weapons inflict -1 Damage to werewolves, but a holy weapon inflicts +1 Damage to minor undead.

Rationale - Damage in combat is intended to be cinematic, where you will get hurt but still have a sporting chance of survival. Even huge weapons (e.g. catapults, cannons, giants, dragons, giant ball traps, etc.) deal 1 Damage, because they are assumed to be a glancing blow or shrapnel from a near-miss, not a direct hit. What are going for here is a fun fight. Outside of combat, if you get yourself into a situation where deadly damage is completely unavoidable then you’ll just die.
Falling
Falls deal 1 Damage for heights of 15 feet or less. Falls of greater than 15 feet are usually fatal, so add 1d6 Damage. For example, a fall of 20 feet inflicts 1d6+1 Damage. (The GM can optionally vary the die size as desired/negotiated, but the intention is to keep high falls simple and deadly.)
Hit Locations
Each attack affects one of your six Hit Locations. The Hit Location determines what protection (such as armor and cover) applies for defense. The GM determines the Hit Location, possibly provides a description of a specific body part, and whether or not your armor protects against the attack.



The Head and Torso are the most vulnerable areas, and the first body parts you should armor. Melee attacks prioritize the fragile Head. Conversely, ranged attacks usually prioritize the "center mass" target of the Torso, and a "near miss" might hit an adjacent area. Also the hands are often the easiest target in melee (since they are the closest target) but present too small of an area to be worthwhile targeting with ranged attacks.

You may use the "Aim” Maneuver to target a specific Hit Location. Otherwise, the GM determines the Hit Location.

When you are attacked, the GM will usually foreshadow aimed attacks, e.g. “the scarred goblin is swinging from the right” or “the scything blade arcs towards your legs”. You can use a Maneuver to position your shield or weapon to cover a Hit Location, either by naming the Hit Location or naming the foe who is attacking, e.g. “I am blocking the goblin chief with my shield”.
Combat Maneuvers
Use your Maneuvers in combat for tactics such as feints, parries, beats, taking cover, and more! Simply spend a Maneuver when you roll COMBO to get an upgrade. 

If you can you should roleplay what you do with your Maneuver, and if you do that before you roll then you may get a broader benefit that can apply to several rolls, such as “I take the high ground”. Maneuvers can have tactical combinations, especially with Weapon Tags. Examples are below, but you should use Maneuvers to describe your own cunning tactics.

Raise Stress when you use a Maneuver that relies on vision (e.g. Aim) or other impeded senses. 
Aim
Choose an available Hit Location (head, torso, arm, hand, waist, or leg) and facing (right/left/front/back), or ask the GM to pick an optimal location for you. You gain COMBO if you are aiming at the Torso since that the the largest area. This Maneuver only applies to a single attack and you must declare it before rolling.
I look for an opening
I aim at center mass
I aim for the gaps
I look for a clean shot
I take his hand with my sword
I cut him in the leg
Advanced Aim
Use two Aim Maneuvers to specify a smaller area within a Hit Location, about the size of your palm, such as the face, fingers, palm, wrist, foot, face, fingers, armpit, etc. Use three Aim Maneuvers for even smaller targets, about the size of your thumb, such as an eye, ear, nose, mouth, etc. This Maneuver only applies to a single attack and you must declare it before rolling.
I hit him in the face (2 Maneuvers)
I hit him in the back of the knee  (3 Maneuvers)
I thrust into his armpit (3 Maneuvers)
I stab him between the armor plates (3 Maneuvers)
I slice off his ear  (3 Maneuvers)
I shoot him in the eye (3 Maneuvers)
Guard
Use a Maneuver to move your weapon or shield to Guard a named Hit Location and side (left or right), such as "Head - left". You upgrade COMBO on attacks against that area. See Weapon and Shield Guards for more advanced details.
I hold my shield high
I shift my poleax to cover my left side
In response to his leg cut, I cover my leg with my sword
Range
Move to a specific combat Range in relation to an opponent. For example, if you are facing a spearman you could move to Short Range, or if you have a spear versus a shorter weapon you could move to Long Range. You upgrade COMBO if you are in optimal Range and your foe is not. (The optimal Range is specified by Weapon Range Tags.) Each Maneuver can move you at most two Range steps, e.g. Far to Medium or Long to Short but not Long to Close. Alternatively use this Maneuver to maintain current Range when an opponent is moving relative to you.
I keep him at long range, ideal for my spear versus his puny knife
I stay close as he tries to flee so I can keep stabbing him with my dagger
Cover & Concealment
Position yourself to take advantage of cover, such as a wall, doorframe, trench, castle parapet, etc. Cover counts as armor, and solid objects usually have better AC than your armor. Cover and concealment also reduces your visible target areas and enemies may seek other targets. This is especially important if you do not have any armor, or lighter armor than the weapons in play. However, your Cover can also limit your options. For example, if you duck behind a low wall then you can’t see your opponents, but if you knelt behind the wall you could shoot over it. If you want to pop out and back behind cover, you need to use Maneuvers to do so. However, enemies who are ready to shoot can still attack you if you do this.
I take cover behind the stone wall 
I dive into the trench
I use the door frame for cover
Keep Down
Crouch, kneel, or crawl to reduce your target area. This lets you upgrade COMBO in defense against ranged attacks, but will limit your ability to spend Maneuvers.
Wrath Stroke
Grip your weapon in two hands and swing a mighty blow. Adds +1 Damage if you roll EFFORT or if the target is Prone or Pinned against a wall. This Maneuver only applies to a single attack and you must declare it before rolling.
I put all my strength into my swing and shout as I smash him down
I reverse my sword and strike the mortshlager murder stroke at his knee (w/ Aim)
Beat
Move your opponent's weapon or shield away from a Guard. Your opponent may spend another Maneuver to restore the Guard.
I beat his blade aside and cut!
I beat his blade with my false edge and cut him in the head (w/ Aim)
Feint
Pretend to attack a Hit Location, but attack somewhere else instead. You {+] COMBO, but perhaps more importantly might fool him into settling into a Guard in the wrong place. 
I cut on the right and then on the left
I feint high and then cut low
I change through to cut to the other side
I redouble my cut
I pull my cut and turn it into a thrust
I disengage my point under his sword and thrust
Grab
Use a free hand to grab part of a foe while at Close Range. You will stay connected and at Close Range until you let go or your opponent uses a Maneuver to get free. If you are much larger and stronger than your foe then you can also keep him from moving.
I grab his shirt and punch him (w/ move Maneuver & attacks Action)
I step in, grab his arm and stab him with my dagger (w/ move Maneuver & attack Action)
Overwatch
Point your ranged weapon along a specific field of fire, such as a line of approach or choke point. You're waiting to attack the first target who appears (although you could describe a specific target), so you upgrade PREP on your attack.
I’m on the roof, covering the alley
I’m aiming at the window, waiting for the sorcerer to appear
Weapon and Shield Guards
You can use a weapon or shield to Guard a Hit Location. A “Guard” is a defensive position that also allows you to launch your attacks. You upgrade COMBO if your weapon or shield is set to “Guard” the Hit Location being attacked.

Your weapon must be able to defend the attack. Melee weapons do not protect against missile weapons, nor do missile weapons protect against melee weapons. Shields are useful against both.
Each Guard covers one Hit Location for one side, so simply say the Hit Location and side (left or right) you are guarding, such as “left leg” or “right head”.
Guards provide Armor in the Hit Location. Shields provide Shield Class which functions the same as Armor Class. Weapons count as Class 1 shields, or Weapon Class with the Defensive Tag.
Shield Guards are relatively static, and only change when you use a Guard Maneuver. In addition to the Hit Location covered by the Guard, shields cover the shield Hand, and Medium and Large shields also cover that Arm. Only Large shields can guard the Leg.
Weapon Guards are much more dynamic and correspond to the starting and finishing positions of attacks and parries. You can move to a Guard for a weapon after each attack Action. For example, you might say "I cut down and guard my left leg", or "I parry up and guard my right head”. However, weapon Guards only protect against melee attacks, not ranged. Otherwise you can use a Guard Maneuver. 
You can Guard against an attack. Instead of a Hit Location, you can Guard against a particular attack , e.g.“I parry his thrust and riposte”.
Each weapon and shield Asset has its own Guard. You can have two Guards if you have a shield or companion weapon. If you combine them together you the best Class +1.
Advanced Guards. You can spend an extra Maneuver to gain +1 WC for your defense.
Wrestling
Wrestling is a way to control your opponent. You can push him, grab his weapon arm, keep him from fleeing, throw him to the ground, break joints, choke him unconscious, or force him to surrender. There are infinite variations, but it all comes down to gaining Control.

Wrestling is an attack Action; choose one of the following techniques. Wrestling requires physical contact, so it is only possible in Close Range.

Push - Force your opponent to move 5 feet in the direction of your choice. Unless you Crit you move with your opponent. 
Throw/Trip - Put your opponent on the ground, putting him Prone, which is a disadvantage on COMBO and gives attackers a +1 WC bonus. You can either remain standing or gain Control by landing on top of your opponent. If you roll COMBO you also deal Damage.
Hold - Gain Control of one Hit Location of your opponent, e.g. an Arm or Head. You gain PREP to continue wrestling or fighting this foe. If you Crit you can disarm his weapon. Maintain the Hold with a Maneuver each Round. Add +1 Weapon Class for attacks vs a foe over whom you have Control.
Pin - Immobilize an opponent whom you already Control. This can be done standing up, or against a surface like the floor or a wall.
Escape - Escape Control of an opponent. On a Crit you execute a "reversal" and now you have Control!
Break/Subdue - If you already Control an opponent's Head, Arm, Hand, Leg, or Foot you choke the neck or hyperextend the joint, dealing Damage. If you Crit you can disarm. You may use a Maneuver to let your opponent submit ("tap out") to avoid Damage. Only works with humanoid anatomy.
Details
Damage - Wrestling attacks only inflict Damage as noted above. Armor does not reduce Damage inflicted by wrestling, but plate armor prevents chokes and joint locks in elbows and knees.
Close Range - Wrestling is only possible at Close Range. Moving to Close Range from a normal melee range (Short/Medium/Long) requires 1 Maneuver.
Weapons - If you wrestle using a weapon with the "Close" range Tag then you gain COMBO. You cannot use weapons with the "Long" range Tag while Close.
Prone - If you are Prone you cannot use Maneuvers involving mobility, and attacks against you gain a +1 WC bonus. You are considered Prone if you are off your feet, e.g. lying on the ground, sitting, kneeling, etc.
Fumbles - If you Fumble, the GM could choose to describe a "reversal" where your foe does the same thing back to you.Part 5: Dooms
Dooms are traumatic conditions and experiences such as wounds, disease, starvation, and poisoning. 
That bone-deep cut the goblin gave you is a Doom, as is your charred left hand from the sorcerer’s baalfire. 

All Dooms are potentially life threatening. As Dooms worsens the effects become more severe, eventually leading to death.

You gain Dooms by failing Saving Throws. You take Damage if you fail a Saving Throw, and any Damage not stopped by armor or cover carries over into a Doom.

This is the same for ALL afflictions, not just sword wounds. For example, “paralysis” creates a Doom with a downward spiral of loss of movement, eventually leading to total paralysis. Other examples:

wound
injury/trauma
deaf/blind
poison/venom
disease
drowning
magical charm
domination
magical sleep
freezing
insanity
lycanthropy
curse
paralysis
petrification
stunned
venom
burns
taint
undead drain
rot grubs
soul drain
insanity
other bad stuff…
Doom Stages
Dooms are very serious life threatening injuries or afflictions. You gain a Doom whenever you fail a Saving Throw and do not deal with all Damage. Each Doom has five checkboxes that indicate the Doom Stage. Check a box for each point of Damage taken for that Doom.



You can Soak 1 Damage each time you are hit. This raises Stress. Roleplay what you do (feel free to let your creativity run wild and take "artistic license", since this is your heroic "plot armor”).

Combine Dooms of the same kind, especially if they are in the same Hit Location. For example, more wounds in the same location, additional poison, more extensive burns, etc. You can Soak Damage when combining Dooms, but the Doom Stage increases by a minimum of 1 (so Soak only helps if you are taking Damage 2+).

New Dooms are Unstable. You take +1 Damage each time you or the GM rolls EFFORT. You or someone else can use an Action and roll to stabilize a Doom. On a Fumble you take +1 Damage.

Healing Dooms requires months of time for natural healing, or just a few hours via a healing Ritual. 
Doom1 (☒☐☐) - Wounded
At Doom1 you know have received a life-threatening wound and are dying. You might might have pain and nausea, and may find it difficult to rest or sleep. You cannot upgrade EFFORT on rolls using the wounded body part. Healing a Doom1 requires many weeks of rest, or a Field Ritual and healing Secret.
Doom2 (☒☒☐) - Disabled
At Doom2 the Hit Location is “disabled”. Using the Hit Location causes 1 Damage and makes it Unstable again. If this is your Head you are possibly delirious or unconscious. Healing a Doom2 requires many months of rest, or a Circle Ritual and healing Secret. 
Doom3 (☒☒☒) - Incapacitated
At Doom3 you are incapacitated and likely to die. You cannot take Actions beyond “death throes” such as complaining, crying, cursing, and making a mess. If you survive you’ve probably lost a hand, limb, internal organ, or dramatically disfiguring scar (e.g. face split in half, frozen joint, back bent sideways, etc). In this case it’s possible for you to continue to play your character, or you could retire from adventuring. Healing a Doom3 requires years, or a Node Ritual and healing Secret. Healing a permanent dismemberment or scar might be possible with a higher Ritual.
Doom4 (☒☒☒+1) - Certain Death
At Doom4 or more your character is certain to die. Hypothetically a High Ritual delivered within a few moments could stop this.
Doom5 (☒☒☒+2) - Immediate Death
At Doom5 or more your character immediately dies. As far as anyone knows this is final.

This is a dangerous game, and your character can die due to unwise actions or bad luck. If your character dies or retires, role-play the last few moments, and recount the legend you have built. For example you might have been eviscerated by the orc’s falchion, crushed dead by the falling boulders, drained soulless by the vampire, turned to stone by the basilisk, eaten alive by the “vorpal squirrels”, or had his brain turned to eggs by the psionic blast of the “squid face”. Afterwards, create a new character, so the GM can get you back into the action. The life of an adventurer is exceedingly dangerous, so you may want to have a few characters on the deck and ready to play.
Recovering Dooms
New Dooms are Unstable and you take +1 Damage each time you or the GM rolls EFFORT. You or someone else can take an Action and roll to stabilize a Doom. On a Fumble you take +1 Damage.
Mundane Stabilization
You can use mundane (non-magical) methods to stabilize a Doom, such as first-aid. Bear in mind you will need to Ready bandages or such using Maneuvers, otherwise you won’t have an Asset (in case you roll ASSET).
Magic Stabilization
You can use a magic Secret to stabilize a Doom, as long as the Secret is appropriate for healing the Doom. For example, a “heal wounds” Secret could stabilize a "sword cut" Doom.

Magic potions, such as a potion of healing, can be used to magically stabilize a Doom. You can either drink the entire potion, or just take a sip and spend Vim. You upgrade ASSET if the name of the potion is ideal for your Doom, e.g. “vial of poison antidote” vs snake venom.
Healing Dooms
Fortunately for you, this game is about having fun adventures, not long-term hospitalization, so you can be cured of nearly anything via some kind of magical healing Ritual.
Healing Rituals
A healing Ritual is a combination of a healing Secret and a Ritual. The Secret must be appropriate for healing the Doom, just like for stabilizing the Doom with magic.

A healing Ritual will heal all Dooms at the level of the Ritual or less. So a Ritual1 heals Doom1, and a Ritual3 heals Doom2 and lower.  The Ritual heals all applicable Dooms from everyone participating in the Ritual (actively or passively), not just one person.

Some rare Dooms might require you to go on a quest or seek out an NPC to find the cure. For example, “vampiric life drain” might require visiting a particular shrine with priests rumored to be able to reverse undead drain. The GM will let you know when this applies. 
Natural Healing
Attempting to heal Dooms naturally works about as well as it did in the medieval era, which is to say very slowly or maybe not at all. A broken bone might heal in a few months of rest, a spear wound in your guts is as likely to kill you from infection as to eventually heal, and an incurable magical disease or curse won’t ever go away.Part 6: Secrets
Secrets are things only your character knows, such as forgotten knowledge, special abilities, or magic spells. 

Just as your character is in your own words, so are your Secrets. You have full creative control to invent your own Secrets that match your character concept. There is no predefined list of Secrets, but here are a few examples to kick start your creativity.
Examples of Secrets
detect magic spell
fireball spell
teleport location
secret base
mastery of a node
location of a lost temple
secret path to ancient ruins
hidden mountain pass
contacts or allies
favor owed
leverage for bribery
location of a magic artifact
secret or long lost language
secret master or teacher
speak with animals
shapeshift to wolf

Martial Arts
Rare, difficult or flashy combat techniques make good Secrets. See Part 4: Combat for more examples.

arrow cutting
dance fighting
disarm with style
flourish
kiai/war cry
flying kick
iron fist/foot
iron body/shirt
leg cutting
sweep attack
zen archery
zornhau

Thievery
Thieves carefully guard secrets of all kinds, and have many specialized (and illegal) skills. Elaborate jobs and heists may require a group of thieves with specialized talents. If you take Secrets for your specialized skills then you can more easily claim ULT when using them, even when surrounded by other thieves. 

appraise
disguise
climb walls
detect noise
fence
find traps
forgery
hide in shadows
map making
move silently
pick pockets
open locks
remove traps
Thieves’ Cant
use poison

Magic Spells
Magic spells and powers are Secrets. You can create any you like, or take inspiration from books, movies, or classic roleplaying games.

Magic-User Spells
detect magic
levitate
lock/unlock
magic shield
read magic
scrying
telekinesis
teleport
ventriloquism

Hallow (Divine) Spells
bless
cure blindness
cure disease
cure poison
cure wounds
detect evil
detect lie
detect magic
dispel evil
dispel magic
hallow
heal
meditation
moonlight
moon blessing
prot. from evil
purify food & drink
remove curse
remove fear
slow poison
speak with animals

Pyromancy (Fire) Spells
blazing arrow
combustion
ring of ashes
smokeless fire
sunfire orb
control fire
flaming arrow
fireball
flame wall
flamberge
hellfire
ignite
purifying flames
fire resistance
vision in the flames

Illusion Spells
audible glamer
blur
color spray
darkness
disguise self
illusory script
invisibility
light
minor illusion
mirror image
phantom fog
phantasmal force
phantasmal killer
phantom steed
prestidigitation
shadow blade
silence
ventriloquism

Necromancy (Death) Spells
animate dead
circle of death
feign death
finger of death
raise dead
resurrection
soul trap
speak with dead
vampiric touch

Magic Rituals
In order to perform a Ritual you need a Secret that describes the Ritual itself, such as “magic circle ritual”.

The Secret must also designate one of the Ritual levels, 1-6 (Field Ritual, Circle Ritual, Node Ritual, etc. Rituals have excellent potential for roleplaying and showing off your magic, since they are used in slow scenes where you have time to use evocative language and imagery. A Ritual restores your Vim and can be combined with a Secret for a powerful effect. For example, you could combine a "moonstone ritual" Ritual with a "heal wounds" Secret for a very powerful healing effect.

prayer ritual
moonstone ritual
temple cleansing
magic circle
dolmen of stones
sacrificial altar
pit of serpents
Feast of the dead
Winter end festival
First harvest festival
Feast of fires
Festival of dooms

Using Secrets
Using a Secret is an Action, and resolved in the same way as a similar Action without a Secret.

Make a roll if a similar Action without the Secret would involve a roll. For example, roll for attacks or other hostile actions, but only roll for movement when doing something risky or flashy such as leaping over a pit. Do not roll for protective Secrets, since you will roll a Saving Throw as needed.

This depends a lot on the specific action and context, so the GM will sometimes tell you to roll, or not to roll. While nobody expects you to roll to light a fire while making camp, it's appropriate to roll when you're short on fuel or it's raining, or in a time-compressed stressful situation such as combat. Thus, using a Secret to create magical light might require a roll in some situations, but not in others.

Always roll if you are using a Secret used in a hostile way, i.e. as an attack. Some Secrets are purely magical attacks, such as a "magic missile" spell. Some clearly have the potential to harm others, such as conjuring a handful of fire. Others seem to be harmless, such as conjuring "moonlight", yet they might burn a wraith or shadow. So this comes down to your intention when using a Secret.
Secrets Cost Vim
Attempting to use a Secret costs 1 Vim.

Exceptions - The following situations do not cost Vim:
When you are just adding roleplaying flavor for fun, not advantage.
When you are using a Secret to justify upgrading ULT.
When your Secret is a skill or knowledge that doesn't involve anything magical or supernatural. You should be prepared to defend this with an explanation as needed. Knowledges such as ancient history or secret languages (e.g. Thieves' Cant, Druidic, Fomorian, Kessrith, Aethiiri, etc) do not cost Vim. For example, a skill such as "quick draw dagger" does not cost Vim, unless you were using magic to accomplish the feat. The GM will limit usage and effect based on what seems plausible without magic.

Powerful Secrets - The GM may require multiple Vim for any Secret that seems more powerful than the sample Secrets in this book. Also keep in mind the most powerful secrets, such as summonings, wishes, resurrections, and doomsday shit, might be Rituals or Paths.
Effects
Each Secret has a special Effect, which is the unique and interesting thing the Secret does. A Secret might make an area glow with moonlight, conjure a ball of fire, create an illusion, charm a person, tie/untie a knot, etc. The possibilities are endless, limited only by your imagination.
Ball of Flame conjures a small palm-sized ball of fire into your hand. The fire doesn't burn your hands, and you could potentially juggle a few balls for fun. 
Conjure Water conjures water, or makes a target wet. 
Freeze turns water cold, possibly even to solid ice.
Friend makes someone regard you as their friend.
Slow halves the normal movement rate of the target.

Secrets target one Person within your line of sight, or by touch. Alternatively you could target a Person-sized object, animal, monster. It doesn't matter what you are targeting, so long as it's about the same size as a typical human person. 

You can also target a Person-sized area, which is the area "occupied" by a person. For tabletop games with a battlemap and miniatures you should consider the area occupied by a Person, which is a subset of one 5'x5' square or hex.

If you want more than one Effect, or want to target more than one Person then you need to discuss that with the GM. This is a negotiation, so you could describe how your Secret isn't very powerful based on the way you've described it, or by adding limitations / restrictions (e.g. only works in shadows). You could also specify your Secret costs extra Vim (e.g. pay 2 Vim to affect multiple people). This is locked in when you take the Secret, not something you can change freely during play, but still something that could change between games over further discussions with the GM.
Damage
If you want to use a Secret to deal Damage, resolve it the same as for an attack without a Secret. So, on a successful attack roll you deal 1 Damage, or 2 for Crit. This is in addition to the normal Effect.

Some Secrets have an obvious way to use them as an attack, such as a "magic missile" spell. Others may be less straightforward and need some creativity. For example, a "palm of fire" Secret might be used to attack a foe by throwing the fire at him, or punching him, or dropping it into the back of his shirt. Be creative and have fun!

Magic Missile deals 1 Damage to a target in line of sight.
Shock deals 1 Damage to a target by touch.
Ball of Flame conjures a small palm-sized ball of fire into your hand. The fire doesn't burn your hands, and you could potentially juggle a few balls for fun. If you hurl the ball of fire you can inflict 1 Damage. Creatures vulnerable to fire, such as trolls, might decide to deal with the fire or flee.
Freeze turns water cold, possibly even to solid ice. If used on a foe this deals 1 Damage.

If you have a Secret which is solely meant to deal Damage, you can describe your Effect as some kind of dramatic, physical intermediary which expands the attack. For example, you could affect up to three people, or a similarly sized area of effect, or say the target can pierce some kind of cover (e.g. "the thorns can grow through wood").

Fan of Sparks deals 1 Damage to everyone in a fan-shaped area in your forward arc (the size of three people attacking you).
Fireballs deals 1 Damage to everyone within one or more blast areas (up to 3 person-sized areas).
Lightning Bolt deals 1 Damage to a target, and then the lightning continues past that person to affect up to two more people.
Glyph of Pain deals 1 Damage to any people in front of you who see it (up to 3 people).
Magic vs Armor
Apply Damage from Secrets directly, without comparing Weapon Class & Armor Class. After all, Secrets often involve weird magic such as songs or evil eyes or acid or psychic blasts, so it's hard to imagine how they would be affected by armor.

Line of Sight - Even though your Secret isn't affected by armor, you must have direct line of sight to your target. Any obstruction such as cover, concealment, or someone in the way blocks your ability to deliver magic to that target. If a portion of the target is visible, you can use the Aim Maneuver to target a visible Hit Location. This means a simple curtain could potentially block your Secret. Magic is weird.
Orichalcum - Armor made of orichalcum allows the defender to upgrade ASSET vs magic attacks, even though magic attacks normally disregard armor. If the attack is targeting a specific Hit Location, the orichalcum armor must cover that location.
Weapon-like Magic Attacks
If your Secret takes the form of a weapon or other physical attack (e.g. "magic arrow”, “holy hammer”, ”stone shards", etc) then the Secret is affected by armor as if it were a normal weapon. In this case you must compare Armor Class and Weapon Class and modify damage accordingly.

If you are not using any Asset you have WC 0.
If you have an Asset, but it does not need to be held in the hands (e.g. an amulet or tattoo) you have WC 1.
If you are using some kind of hand-held magic focus which needs to be equipped, such as a wand, orb, staff, etc, then you are WC 3.
If you are using a weapon to deliver a Secret, then use its Weapon Class with a +3 bonus. For example, a warbow (Class 3) firing a "magic arrow" would be WC 6. You would also have WC 6 if you are using a wizard staff (Class 3) to smite a foe.

Orichalcum - Armor made of orichalcum has an Armor Class bonus of +3 vs magic attacks which deal damage.
Bonus Maneuvers
Some Secrets can grant a Bonus Maneuver. For example,  "quick draw dagger" readies your dagger, or a "quick step" lets you move 5 feet, without spending a Maneuver.

You may only gain one (1) Bonus Maneuver per round. This increases to two if you are not wearing any armor.
Healing Secrets
Healing Secrets can be used in two ways: as a first-aid Action to stabilize a Doom, or as a Ritual to heal a Doom. Each healing Secret can only cure one specific kind of Doom, for example: 
Cure Wounds heals wounds caused by weapons or objects. Does not work if there are complications such as poison, burns, etc.
Slow Poison heals wounds complicated by poison or venom. This includes stabilization of a wound that delivered the poison, such as weapon, bite or sting.
Pyromancer's Salve heals burns, as well as extinguishing active flames and cooling boiling liquids.
Purifying Fyre burns away unholy Taint caused by the touch of a Kha'din or other evil spirit. 
Protective Secrets
Protective Secrets grant you a form of resistance or partial immunity to a specific type of Damage, such as "fire" or "swords". This allows you to Soak Damage of that type using Vim instead of Stress. Use an Action to protect another person for as you Maintain the Secret. Use a Ritual to protect multiple people (1 person per Ritual Vim).

Protection vs Fire protects vs fire.
Wardpact vs Swords protects vs swords and daggers.
Protection vs Arrows protects vs arrows.
Protection from Evil protects vs hostile spells of any kind, except those which deal Damage.
Armor of Faith protects vs unholy spells, defined as those cast by saints or minions of an evil god who is an enemy of your god.
Mage Shield is a floating force-disc shield which Guards one Hit Location, changeable with a Maneuver.
Conjuration Secrets
Secrets can be used to conjure (create) Common Assets. These are not fully real, and only last for as long as you Maintain the Secret.

Create Water creates a person-sized amount of water.
Conjure Item creates a small item in your hand.
Forest Spear [Class3 2H ...] creates a wooden spear.
Transformation Secrets
Some characters can undergo a transformation from "human" form to a special ancestral form such as Drisi or Karrocks. The Secret transforms you into the special ancestral form, which activates any Innate Assets you have taken for that ancestral form, such as a Drisi "snake bite" or a Karrock "stone body". Otherwise those Innate Assets are inactive and essentially don't exist.
Secrets Use Assets
You can upgrade ASSET if your Asset has a Signature to help your Secret, such as a "wand of fire", "runesword" or "Aethiiri singing bow". 
Reversible Secrets
Secrets are freely "reversible". For example, an “unlock” spell could also be used to close the lock.
Maintained Secrets
Some Secrets can be “maintained” over time, such as a “protection from fire” spell. However, they end when you recover Vim (i.e. sleeping or a Ritual).
Movement Secrets
Secrets can increase your movement. If this enhances normal you do not need to roll, unless you would normally need to roll for movement (e.g. leaping over a pit). Maintaining an effect (*) requires you to use at least one Maneuvers per round, or the Secret ends.

Flying allows you to fly, possibly growing wings or manifesting aetheric energies.
Folded Step transports you to a location in line of sight.
Secret Fumbles
Fumbles - The GM may assign additional consequences for any Fumble, including Damage, Stress, Vim, or effects. The GM may allow a Saving Throw. 
Fumbles are often more dramatic (or dangerous) when a Secret is involved, especially if it has an area of effect. For example, a fumbled fireball spell might blow up in your face and/or affect your allies. Secrets which do not have obvious damaging effects might still inflict Damage on you or others due to the magical drain, backlash, or instability. The GM will usually allow a Saving Throw. Always consider whether using a secret is really necessary.
Gaining Secrets
You can gain a new Secret as a Path. For example, a Thief might find a trap and reverse-engineer the mechanism to create a similar trap, or a wizard might study a spell from an old tome.

You must have a supporting Theme for every Secret. For example, "Wizard" could support various magic spells such as “magic sight”, "wizard light", "magic shield", "levitate", etc.

Access to powerful Secrets such as "fly", "fireball", "suggestion", etc, is restricted. You must have an appropriate supporting Signature, not just a Theme, and also a supporting chain of lesser Secrets. So if you want to learn a powerful spell like “fireball” you would need first learn a few lesser spells like "conjure flame", “fire arrow”, etc. 

The above are guidelines for you and the GM to help you build your dream character, but keep your concept consistent, and avoid player character imbalance. Since Secrets are in your own words, the GM will usually adopt a "trust and verify" approach, where you are allowed to write your Secrets and even try them, but require adjustments as needed to match these guidelines.
If I told you it wouldn’t be a secret…
Secrets are complex and must be thoroughly earned; characters cannot simply swap Secrets with each other. The same goes with finding a spellbook. After all, owning a chemistry or physics textbook doesn’t necessarily mean you have absorbed the material and can apply it. Mastering anything takes time and dedication.
Part 7: Rituals
Rituals are elaborate ceremonies that invoke mystical power. Participating in a Ritual restores your Vim and prepare an Ultimate. Performing a Ritual yourself lets you invoke a powerful Ritual Secret. There are five levels of Rituals, each increasing in power.

Field Rituals (5 Vim) are expedient and can take place anywhere, in just 2-3 hours. Thus they are the mainstay of magic-users and priests who spend their lives on the move and can't always take the time to sleep to recover power.
Circle Rituals (10 Vim) are field rituals that involve construction of a ritual focus such as a magic circle, altar, shrine, circle of stones, dolmen, tori gate, etc. This requires preparation, time and/or potentially costly materials such as powdered silver. Circle Rituals take 4-6 hours, or more as appropriate based on what you build.
Node Rituals (15 Vim) are circle rituals within a mystic place of power such as a Node, Kalla, holy ground, etc. Node Rituals take 8-12 hours, depending on your attunement to the Node.
High Rituals (20-30 Vim) are node rituals for specific high days of the year, such as changing seasons, harvests, equinox, solstice, etc. High Rituals are celebrated with cultural rituals and festivals for multiple days. You will have a dozen High Rituals per year. 
Aeonic Rituals are unique, each performed just once, ever! They are immensely powerful, able to transform the practitioner into a demi-god, destroy the world, or perhaps both.

When you participate in a Ritual, your Vim is restored to the number specified by that Ritual, e.g. Field Rituals are 5, Circle Rituals are 10, etc. This happens when the Ritual is completed. However, if your Vim is negative it will not raise unless the Ritual earns enough Vim to set you to above zero. Thus, at Vim -5 a Field Ritual will not help!
Performing Rituals
Performing a Ritual requires a Secret, which corresponds to a specific Ritual level (e.g. Field, Circle, etc). You need to make this clear in the Secret name (e.g. “magic circle ritual”, “faerie ring”, etc.) or in a footnote “silver ritual (Circle)”, etc. 

When you perform a Ritual, roleplay the ceremony that you undertake in as much detail as you can. For example, you might describe your Circle Ritual as tracing intricate geometric shapes and runes in powdered silver and white chalk. While this is a great moment to take center stage, be inclusive and involve the other players.
Ritual Secrets
When you perform a Ritual, you can choose one of your Secrets (or from those offered by participants) to become a Ritual Secret.

Ritual Secrets are major magics that make normal Secrets look like mere cantrips and cheap parlor tricks. These are highly-empowered versions of normal Secrets. You could summon a fire elemental, control the weather, open a Node gate, etc. The GM may limit what you can do with normal Secrets, ruling that you need to use a Ritual to get the full benefit. The most common example are the Healing Rituals described in Part 5: Dooms.
Ultimates (optional)
Ultimates are legendary feats that have the potential to define the climax of a scene. A swarm of fiery meteors could rout an army, or a failed attempt to take down the “big bad boss” could end with a just-in-time teleport to safety. Ultimates are your “hail mary”, your “nuke”, and your “get out of jail free card”. They can be the play of the game. Ultimates can create memories that form the legend of your character. Each Ultimate can only happen once, ever.

You can prepare your Ultimate whenever you participate in a Ritual. Your Ultimate needs to be extremely specific, within the bounds of your Themes, and loosely related to your Secrets. This is usually a free-form discussion or negotiation with the GM. You can only have one Ultimate prepared at a time.

You must use an Action to Ready your Ultimate before use; this must include a dramatic display so everyone knows what you are about to do, and you should roleplay this to the hilt. After all, you’re going to be remembered for this forever. The GM will do the same for villains!

Using your Ultimate drains your Vim by 1d20 or to zero, whichever is lower, so your timing matters. Also, each Ultimate can only ever happen once. In terms of effect, Ultimates are more powerful than Secrets, but less powerful than Ritual Secrets.Part 8: Advanced Assets
This section provides advanced rules for Assets beyond the basics presented above. You can skip this for a casual game.

Some Assets have enhancements in the form of Signatures and Secrets; otherwise they still function normally, but aren’t anything special. Assets can also have Tags, which provide tactical advantages and disadvantages in combat. 
Signature Assets
Signature Assets have exceptional or special qualities which are described by Signatures. An object might have a famous name and history such as “Naurdring the goblin slicer”, or might be very high quality such as "tunic, royal blue with gold embroidering" or unusual “cloak, velvet green, warm, with lots of little pockets inside”. If the Signature doesn’t include the Asset type, write that afterwards along with Tags, e.g. "Naurdring, the goblin slicer [Longsword Class3...]".

You can declare a relevant Asset Signature to upgrade ASSET. For example, if you attack a goblin and roll ASSET then you can upgrade if you are wielding “longsword,  Naurdring the goblin slicer”. Similarly, wearing clothing such as "tunic, royal blue with gold embroidering" could help you in social interactions in high society.

Be warned, if an Asset becomes damaged it may lose these special qualities. For example, “clothing - very fine velvet” could become easily ruined by a crawl through a cavern. Consider reserving especially fine Assets for when you really need them.

Assets can also have Secrets, such as magic powers or special abilities. You could find a ring with a secret compartment, a magic sword that detects evil, or a flask of holy water that heals wounds. Asset Secrets work the same and are subject to the same requirements as other Secrets, e.g. you need a supporting Theme, must spend Vim, etc.
Asset Tags
Asset Tags describe various qualities of the Asset, such as weapon range or features. 

Weapons and armor always have a "Class" Tag, for comparing weapon penetration and armor resistance. Some Tags are be followed by a value, such as Class2, Class3, Far3, Far4, etc. The value can be positive or negative, and if omitted from a Tag defaults to "1".

When counting Damage, compare Weapon Class and Armor Class for the Hit Location. Add +1 Damage if the weapon is higher, or -1 Damage if the armor is higher. If you have a shield covering the Hit Location then you can use Shield Class in place of Armor Class.

The following table is a summary of the arms and armor of the Dragon Isles. The Northmarens generally have early medieval weapons and armor, the Southmarens have late medieval or early Renaissance, and the Eldar have exotic and magical arms.
Weapons
Weapons are tools of war, designed to slay foes and keep you safe.

Melee weapons such as swords, axes, and spears are made for hand-to-hand combat, up close and personal. Melee weapons have various lengths, from long spears to short daggers, so you should always maneuver to an optional range for your weapon.

Missile weapons such as bows are built for attacking at a distance. When using a missile weapon you should maneuver to keep away from melee opponents and find the best lines of sight to shoot foes while using cover to block their lines of sight.

Two-handed weapons need two hands to use, and this is indicated by the "2H" Weapon Tag. If necessary you can use a 2H melee weapon in single hand, but this reduces Weapon Class by 1 and does not grant beneficial Weapon Tags. (Not an option for bows.)
Common Weapons
These weapons are the most commonly available, being relatively easy to produce and acceptable for carry by a common person. Everyone carries a knife, and travelers usually carry a staff.

Pugilism [Class0 Close Unarmed] various kicks, punches, knees, foot stomps, and other unarmed attacks
Knife [Class1 Close Short Stabbity Civil] common belt knife
Throwing Knife [Class1 Close Short Stabbity Far1]
Stick or Stone [Class1 Short Far1Primitive] sturdy tree branch, rock, etc.
Cane [Class1 Short Civil] a gentlemanly stout walking stick or cudgel
Sickle [Class1 Short Hooking Tool Fragile] for grain
Hatchet [Class1 Short Breaching Tool] small for chopping wood
Messer / Machete [Class2 Medium Cutty] long work knife
Wood Ax [Class2 2H Medium Breaching Tool] for chopping wood
Scythe [Class2 2H Medium Tool Fragile] blade for harvesting wheat
Spear [Class3 2H Medium Far1 Piercing Primitive] short thrusting and throwing spear used regularly in hunting and warfare, typically 5-6 feet in length (about your height), simple and effective.
Staff / Quarterstaff [Class3 2H Medium Control-Medium Civil] stout staff around nose- or head-height. Common, simple, & effective.
Long Staff [Class3 2H Long] staff about as high as you can reach
Maul [Class4 2H Medium Crushy Primitive] huge, heavy club
Swords and Daggers
Swords are versatile sidearms which are particularly excellent at defense, able to parry and deflect most weapons.

Pommel [Class1 Close] counterweight end of a dagger or sword
Dagger [Class2 Close Stabbity] military double-edged dagger
Parrying Dagger [Class2 Close Binding Handguard Defensive Stabbity] left-handed dagger wielded to accompany a sword Rondel [Class2 Close Stabbity] triangular thrusting war dagger, used to pierce gaps in armor, especially while grappling. Carried by many knights and man-at-arms.
Cutlass [Class2 Short Defensive Handguard Cutty] short curved cutting sword, e.g. a machete, hanger, langes messer, or dussack.
Short Sword [Class2 Short Defensive Piercing Stabbity] short straight stabbing sword, such as a katzbalger or cinquedea.
Arming sword [Class2 Medium Binding Defensive Piercing Cutty] a simple, iconic straight sword with hilt, such as a viking or knight’s sword.
Sidesword [Class2 Medium Handguard Binding Defensive Piercing Cutty] “the sword by your side”, a typical military or civilian sidearm sword, such as an arming sword, spada di filo, or cavalry sword
Sabre [Class2 Medium Defensive Cutty] long curved cutting sword. A thin bladed scimitar can be a sabre, otherwise it is a falchion.
Rapier [Class2 Medium Handguard Binding Defensive Piercing Cutty] civilian sword, popular with nobles and duelists in Aquila.
Falchion [Class3 Medium Binding Defensive Cutty] distinctive curved sword with a clipped tip which can bind with an opponent’s weapon, also known as a storta, malchus, or scimitar.
Longsword [Class3 2H Short-Medium Control-Medium Binding Defensive Piercing Cutty] e.g. bastard sword, kriegsmesser, or Alu "av-kel" sword
Swiss Saber [Class3 2H Medium Binding Handguard Defensive Piercing Cutty] a curved longsword with an elaborate handguard
Greatsword [Class4 2H Medium-Long Control-Medium Handguard Binding Defensive Piercing Cutty Secret] a two-handed sword such as a spadone, montante, or zweihander. Can attack in any direction.
Military Weapons
These weapons are strongly associated with military units. Most are more complicated to learn than simple peasant weapons, requiring at least some training in a military order. Many cities and towns restrict possession of military weapons within the walls except by official town guards, as carrying them shouldn’t be necessary and may indicate the owner is up to no good. The GM may declare that town guards harass characters so that they must pay fines or have their weapons confiscated.

Shield Punch [Class1 Close Binding Defensive] uses the boss or rim
Rifle Stock [Class1 2H Short] using the heavy rifle stock as a club.
Javelin [Class1 Short Far2 Piercing Primitive] short throwing spear
Small Ax [Class2 Close Short Binding Breaching Hooking Far1] war hatchet or tomahawk, with a thin head and long handle
Rifle Bayonet [Class2 2H Medium] spear point on the barrel of a rifle
Khopesh [Class2 Short Medium Binding Hooking] a sickle-shaped sword-ax common in ancient times and still used by some Eldar
Mace [Class3 Short Crushy] wooden or metal club with flanges, beaks, or spikes for crushing armored foes. Needs space to be swung to full effect. Includes short impact weapons such as the short war hammer, horseman's hammer, morningstar, etc.
Horseman's Ax [Class3 Short Breaching Hooking Crushy] medium sized ax with a rear spike for penetrating armor.
Spear [Class3 2H Medium Far1 Piercing Primitive] short thrusting and throwing spear used regularly in hunting and warfare, typically 5-6 feet in length (about your height), simple and effective.
Long Spear [Class3 2H Medium Long Defensive Piercing] long thrusting and cutting spear (or glaive) used regularly in warfare, typically 8-10 feet in length (your height with your arm extended above your head).
Pike [Class3 2H Long Piercing] extremely long spear (typically 15-20 feet in length) used in mass infantry warfare. Pikes are not effective in individual combat except in a duel, so the range is listed as "Long".
Battle Ax [Class4 2H Medium Breaching Hooking] heavy two-handed war axe with a handle shorter than a polearm.
Mangual Flail [Class4 2H Medium Long Hooking Control] large multi-headed military flail. Only use the high guard (Head Guard) if you want to avoid hitting yourself.
Pick [Class4 2H Medium Hooking Piercing] large footman's pick, with a distinctive arced head that can strike over shields.
Ranseur [Class4 2H Long Binding Defensive] a very popular early polearm with a trident-shaped head, also known as roncone or ronka. The side prongs are for binding and trapping weapons and shields. Also known as a spetum, especially by Eldar in earlier aeons. Some versions can be folded, and others such as the brandistock or "feather staff" have hidden prongs that spring out from one end.
Glaive [Class4 2H Long Cutty Hooking] polearm with a large single-edge cutting blade, usually with a hook on the back, but no spear point. Also known as a fauchard, especially by Eldar in earlier aeons.
Guisarme [Class4 2H Long Binding Hooking] a polearm with a concave scythe-like blade (such as for pruning), usually with a spike for thrusting and various prongs for pulling. Includes similar weapons such as the bill, bill hook, and scorpion, etc.
Partisan [Class4 2H Medium Long Cutty Binding Defensive] elegant polearm with a sword-like head with guard allowing a shorter grip.
Poleaxe [Class5 2H Medium Control-Short Hooking Defensive] the predominant knightly polearm for armored combat, a short stout staff with axe, hammer, and spike. Includes similar weapons such as lochaber ax, bec de corbin, etc, 
Long axe [Class5 2H Medium Long] a very long battle axe. 
Halberd [Class5 2H Medium Long Binding Hooking Defensive] popular polearm with a spike for thrusting, ax for cutting, and multiple hooks for pulling. Includes similar weapons such as bardiche, voulge, etc. 
Projectile Weapons
Projectile weapons shoot ammunition. The three main projectile weapon types are bows, crossbows, and guns. Loading or reloading the weapon costs Maneuvers equal to the Reload Weapon Tag.

Primitive Bow [Class1 2H Far2 Reload1 Primitive Civil] a self-made or primitive shortbow, quickly and easily crafted, firing simple all-wood arrows with sharpened wood tips and no fletching.
Hunting sling [Class1 2H Far4 Reload3 Primitive Civil] a common light sling, shooting stones or clay. Requires years of practice.
Hunting bow [Class2 2H Far4 Reload1 Civil] the most common short bow. Hunting arrows usually have broad heads, but simple round heads (Class1) are often used for birds or smaller game.
War sling [Class2 2H Far3 Reload4 Secret] larger more powerful sling for war, hurling cast-lead aerodynamic projectiles.
Warbow [Class3 2H Far3 Accurate Reload1 Secret] a heavy draw short bow, able to shoot heavy armor-piercing bodkin arrows, but requires years of training and conditioning.
Hunting Crossbow [Class3 2H Far4 Accurate Reload3] easy to shoot
Longbow [Class3 Far5 Accurate Reload1 Secret] a large self bow, taller than the archer, with impressive power, range, and accuracy, but with a slower rate of fire than hunting bows.
Heavy Longbow [Class4 Far5 Accurate Reload2 Secret] a heavy draw longbow, able to shoot heavy military arrows (50% heavier than standard arrows). Requires years of training and conditioning.
Heavy crossbow [Class5 Far4 Accurate Reload7] military crossbow, easy to learn and hard-hitting, but cumbersome and slow to reload. 
Flintlock pistol [Class5 Far4 Accurate Reload7] basic Dwur pistol
Doubloon [Class5 Far2 Reload7 (each)] a double-shot flintlock pistol blunderbuss, often with a nautical/pirate theme.
Shotgonnne [Class5 Far2 Reload9 (each)] a double-barreled hand cannon meant for “intimate encounters”, up-close personal combat. Each barrel must be loaded, primed, and fired independently.
Siege arbalest [Class6 Far5 Accurate Reload12 Secret] very heavy and powerful crossbow, but extremely slow to reload.
Arquebus [Class6 Far4 Accurate Reload9 Secret] a newer, more accurate version of the hand cannon with a true rifle shape and a matchlock. 
Flintlock rifle [Class6 Far5 Accurate Reload8 Secret] a rifle using a flintlock. 
Handgonne [Class7 Far3 Reload12 Secret] a hand cannon consisting of a heavy barrel, handle, and socket for inserting a stock or staff. 

Bows vs Crossbows
Bows require more training, especially warbows are a specialist profession
Bows are simpler to craft
Bows require physical conditioning (strength)
Bows are lighter and easier to aim and reload on the move
Bows have a faster rate of fire
Crossbows do not require strength to hold ready
Crossbows are more optimal for fielding armies, since training takes less time and troops can still fight when hurt or weakened by malnutrition or disease
Bows are ready if the bow is in hand with an arrow knocked. Drawing and releasing the bow is part of your attack—you don’t hold your bow drawn for long periods of time.
Crossbows are not carried loaded, as the bolt simply falls out if the crossbow is tilted.
Weapon Tags
Weapons have Tags to represent their characteristics; many also describe a way you can upgrade COMBO in specific circumstances. Weapons tend to fall into two broad categories, main weapons such as spears and axes, then sidearms such as swords and daggers. Larger weapons are inherently more powerful and thus tend to have a higher Weapon Class and more Tags than smaller weapons. 
Weapon Class
Weapon Class is the penetration of the weapon versus contemporary armor types (i.e. of the same era). When counting Damage, compare Weapon Class and Armor Class and add +1 Damage if the weapon is higher, or -1 Damage if the armor is higher.

Military Weapons - Weapons of Class3 or higher are perceived as "military weapons" and not usually permitted in civilized areas such as cities, towns, taverns, etc, unless they have the Civil Tag.
Two-Handed Weapons
Two-handed weapons are optimized for use in two hands, and tend to be longer and heavier than other weapons. Two-handed weapons are designated by the 2H Tag. If you use a 2H weapon in one hand reduce Weapon Class by 1 and you do not benefit from Asset Tags.
Weapon Range Tags
Weapon Range Tags specify the optimal Range (i.e. the distance between attacker and target) for using a weapon. You can upgrade COMBO if you are at your optimal range and your opponent is not.



Close: is the optimal range for unarmed attacks, and unarmed attacks can only attack at this range. Fighters can punch, kick, grab, wrestle, throw, elbow, knee, head butt, pommel strike, and even bite. A sword pommel is a Class 1 weapon with the Close Tag.
Short: is the optimal range of most melee weapons, but any weapon can attack at this range. Any thrusting melee weapon wielded in two hands (e.g. a sword held in "halfsword") is optimal at Short range.
Medium: is the optimal range for longer melee weapons such as swords, but any weapon can attack at this range.
Long: is the optimal range spears and polearms, and melee weapons may only attack at this range if they have the “Long” Tag.
Far: is at least 10 feet away, out of reach of melee weapons. Only weapons with a Far tag can attack at Far range.
Advanced Weapon Tags
Accurate weapons are capable of very long ranged shots in the hands of a skilled marksman. You can increase your optimal range by one step (e.g. "Far" >> "Far3") by spending an Action to adjust for gravity, wind, etc, as long as you have a supporting Theme or Trait (e.g. "marksman", "archer", "sharpshooter", etc.). You can do this multiple times, up to double normal range (e.g. "Far3" can become "Far5"). You lose the benefits if you move or take any other Action.
Binding weapons such as swords can be used to "bind" with an opponent's weapon, touching and then keeping "sticky" contact, which helps you influence and track the weapon. Use a Maneuver to "bind" with an opponent's weapon, which lets you upgrade COMBO on attacks and defenses for that opponent. You can also use a bind Maneuver in response to an opponent's bind Maneuver, and whoever does this last is "winning the bind" and upgrades COMBO.
Breaching weapons are strong and capable of forcing open doors, chests, windows, etc. Other weapons break under this kind of abuse. 
Civil weapons are less threatening and legal to carry in towns.
Control weapons such as long swords and short polearms can be easily turned to strike in any direction. That is useful in itself, and also makes them ideal for controlling an area and fending off multiple opponents. If the GM raises Hazard because you are surrounded or flanked by opponents, you can spend a Maneuver to negate the raise. This only works if using two hands and at the range specified, e.g. "Control-Medium".
Cutty weapons such as swords can cleave through soft targets. After a Critical hit against a soft target (i.e. your WC is better than their AC) you may attack again with the same weapon.
Custom weapons are higher-quality, bespoke and perfectly made.
Defensive weapons are equivalent to a shield using Weapon Class. 
Fragile weapons break on a Fumble. 
Handguard weapons have a complex hilt such as a rapier's rings or basket hilt sword, which protects the hand, a very common target. This counts as AC 2 armor for the weapon hand.
Hooking weapons such as sickles and some polearms are able to cut behind the target. When you Aim, you can choose strike the rear instead of left/right, which grants a +1 WC bonus.
Piercing weapons have an extended straight and rigid blade at least 2 feet long, which enables them to reach deep into a target. This grants a +1 WC bonus when fighting Large Monsters, who have an higher AC since their vitals are deeper in their bodies than men.
Primitive weapons are easy to build, requiring very low skills, time, and materials, and tools. They might still be found in use by primitive tribes, but for modern peoples would only be found self-made or improvised when nothing else is available.
Reload indicates the weapon must be reloaded before attacking again. This applies to projectile weapons such as bows, crossbows, and firearms. The number after the Reload Tag (e.g. Reload1, Reload3, etc.) indicates the number Maneuvers needed (min 1).
Secret weapons require a lifetime of dedication to use. You must have a specific Theme or a Secret to use this weapon. For example, the longbow requires tremendous strength, so you would need a Theme such as "Longbowman" or a Secret such as “Longbow".
Stabbity weapons are optimized for lots of stabbing or “shanking”. After a Critical hit you may spend a Maneuver to attack again with the same weapon in the same Hit Location.

Armor
The purpose of armor is to protect your vitals from threats you expect to face. Your ancestors only had to deal with weapons of their time period, but you will also face a variety of monsters!
Armor is a tradeoff of coverage and mobility, so you should wear the minimal armor you feel necessary. In addition, you may need to make compromises based on your intended tasks, such as riding a horse, commanding troops, shooting a bow, playing a mandolin, climbing and spelunking in a deep dark caves, etc. Even knights only wear full armor when they need to!
Armor Coverage
Your suit of armor has an Armor Tag which lists your Hit Locations covered and number of Maneuvers per round.



Coverage - Your number of Maneuvers per Round is determined by your number of Hit Locations covered by armor. (1-2 Hit Locations is 3 Maneuvers, 3-4 Hit Locations is 2 Maneuvers, and 5-6 Hit Locations is 1 Maneuver.) Note that some areas of the rules say you get "2 Maneuvers per round", but this is just for readability since that is the average.

Pieces of Exchange - Armor suits are comprised of many smaller pieces. The highest quality armors have modular "pieces of exchange" suiting different purposes. You can customize your armor coverage by adding or removing removing pieces. For example, you might strip down to Body-Armor for travel, then add other pieces to gear up to Half- or Full-Armor when expecting battle, or change pieces whether on foot or on horse.

Gaps - Armor always has gaps, no matter how well it has been constructed. Almost all armor has gaps in the face, armpits, inside elbow, fingers, palms, inner wrists, gauntlet cuffs, groin, buttocks, inner thighs, back of knees, back of legs, and feet. In addition, armor tends to be absent or thinner on the rear and flanks. You can target these gaps by using the Advanced Aim Maneuver.

Partial Armor - Some armor pieces only give “Partial" protection, and do not protect an entire Hit Location. Partial Armor only provides protection if you roll ASSET on your Saving Throw, but does not count as Coverage or reduce Maneuvers per Round.
Body-Armor
If you wear Body-Armor you armor coverage for your Head and Torso and get 3 Maneuvers per round. This armor just covers the most vital areas.

Doublet Vest [Class1 Body-Armor] fashionable vest.
Light Gambeson Vest [Class1 Body-Armor] 16-layer gambeson
Gambeson Vest [Class2 Body-Armor] thick padded or quilted textile armor, 30 layers thick.
Cuirie [Class2 Body-Armor] hardened leather cuirass made of cuir-bouilli (boiled leather).
Concealed Mail Shirt [Class2 Body-Armor] chain mail shirt without gambeson, worn concealed under clothing.
Mail Shirt [Class3 Body-Armor] chain mail shirt over light gambeson.
Breastplate [Class3 Body-Armor] steel breastplate, only covering the front, worn over clothing
Plate Cuirass [Class4 Body-Armor] steel breastplate and backplate, worn over light gambeson.
Plate Cuirass with pauldrons [Class5 Body-Armor] steel breastplate and backplate with shoulders, worn over light gambeson
Half-Armor
If you wear Half-Armor you have armor coverage for your Head, Arms, Hands, and Torso, and get 2 Maneuvers per round. Half-Armor is commonly worn with a shield and/or gauntlets.

Doublet [Class1 Half-Armor Civil Soft] a jacket made of stitched and quilted linen ("doubling") made to be worn by itself. Originally these were gambeson, but eventually became fashionable. The head is protected by a fashionable hat or cap.
Gambeson [Class2 Half-Armor Soft] a jacket made of stitched and quilted linen ("doubling") made to be worn under ("doubled under") a cuirass, hauberk, or plate to prevent bruising and chafing. May include arming points for attaching plates, with small patches of mail to cover gaps in the plates. Made of multiple layers of cotton, linen, wool, or leather, it also doubled as a coat. Also known as an aketon, padded jack, arming jack, or arming doublet. The head is protected by a cloth arming cap.
Scale Armor [Class2 Half-Armor] is made of small leather or metal plates attached to each other and a backing in interlocking rows.
Coat of Plates [Class3 Half-Armor] is a coat of brigandine, consisting of plates sewn onto or between layers of cloth or leather. Inexpensive, widely available, and easily repaired. The head is protected by a leather cap.
Coat of Plates and Mail [Class4 Half-Armor] is a coat of brigandine worn over a mail hauberk.	The head is protected by a mail coif.
3Qtr-Armor
If you wear 3Qtr-Armor you have armor coverage for your Head, Arms, Torso, and Waist, and get 2 Maneuvers per round. This armor is popular with troops who need nimble hands, such as archers, gunners, or swashbucklers (using sword and buckler).

Mail Hauberk [Class3 3Qtr-Armor] is a full shirt of mail (chainmail), reaching at least to mid-thigh, and including sleeves. Always worn over light gambeson. The head is protected by a mail coif.
Three-Quarters Plate [Class4 3Qtr-Armor Visor Custom] is suit of fully articulated light metal plate armor.
Dwur Plate [Class5 3Qtr-Armor Visor Custom] is an advanced suit of fully articulated metal plate armor. Dwur plate is traditionally decorated in "grotesque" style, helm and plates resembling an animal or monster.
Full-Armor
If you wear Full-Armor you have armor Coverage for your Head, Arms, Torso, Waist, and Legs, and get 1 Maneuver per round. This armor is popular with soldiers who wield large two-handed weapons.

Full Mail [Class3 Full-Armor] is a full suit of mail (chainmail), including the hauberk, coif, and chausses (leg protection). Always worn over light gambeson.
Plated Mail [Class4 Full-Armor Custom] armor is mail covered by embedded metal plates. The plates can vary in style significantly, and sometimes include a cuirie, coat of plates, or cuirass. This heavy armor was worn by the early knights. 
Full Plate [Class5 Full-Armor Visor Custom] is an advanced, fully articulated light steel plate armor, the pinnacle of protection. Rare, expensive, and time-consuming to build.
Armor Pieces
Some armor pieces only give “Partial" protection, and do not protect an entire Hit Location. Partial Armor only provides protection if you roll ASSET on your Saving Throw, but does not count as Coverage or reduce Maneuvers per Round.

You may also exchange pieces in your suit of armor (if any), for example if you find magical gauntlets you could replace your old gauntlets. In this case they do not count as Partial.
Clothing
Hooded Cloak [Class1 Soft Civil Cloak Partial] thick robes with long sleeves and hood, possibly with some boiled leather or metal reinforcements. Worn by monks, wizards, and cultists everywhere
Plumed Hat [Class1 Hat Soft Civil Partial] feathered hat.
Pointed Hat [Class1 Hat Soft Civil Partial] big conical floppy wizard hat, somehow always stays up there
Head
The head is arguably the most important location to protect, and all armor suits cover this location. If you wear one of these armor pieces be sure that the Class is higher than your armor suit, or you receive some other advantage.
Coif or Arming Cap [Class1 Hat] are hoods of stitched leather or quilted cloth, often worn under a helm or coif as padding.
Cervelliere "skull cap" [Class1 Hat] are round tight-fitting steel caps.
Kettle Hat [Class1 Hat] is a helmet made of steel in the shape of a wide-brimmed hat. Inexpensive, effective, and popular with infantry, but are not seen as fashionable.
Mail Coif [Class2 Helm] are hoods of mail (chainmail) or scale, often incorporated into a hauberk or camail.
Barbute [Class3 Helm Closed] a visor-less bronze helm with a distinctive "T" shaped opening for the eyes and mouth. Includes an integral lining, so no arming cap is needed.
Spangenhelm [Class2 Helm] is a Northmaren helm made of metal strips with a distinctive mask protecting the eyes (q.v. Gjermundbu helmet), and decorated with wings, horns, knots, etc. Worn as a cap and very easy to put on and take off.
Gorget [Class3 Gorget Partial] stiff collar of brigandine for the throat
Bevor [Class4 Gorget Partial] hard plate collar for the throat.
Full Spangenhelm [Class3 Helm] is a spangenhelm with added protections such as cheek guards and a mail aventail.
Bascinet [Class3 Helm] a medieval conical open-faced helm. Includes an integral lining, so no arming cap is needed.
Sallet [Class3 Helm] are open-faced helms, lined with cloth.
Burgonets [Class3 Helm] are open-faced helms. Includes an integral lining, so no arming cap is needed.
Close Helm [Class3 Helm Visored] a steel helm that fully encloses the head and neck, with an integral visor that pivots up.
Armet [Class4 Helm Visored] are early fully-enclosed visored helmets compact and light enough to move with the wearer.
Hounskull [Class5 Helm Visored] are heavy bascinets with a "dog faced" conical visor and aventail. Lined so no arming cap is needed.
Great Helm [Class5 Helm Closed] are flat-topped cylinders of steel that completely cover the head and have only very small openings for the eyes and mouth. Use an Action to put it on or take it off.
Arms
Leather Bracers [Class1 Arm Civl Soft Partial] hard leather forearms
Splint Vambraces [Class2 Arm Partial] metal banded forearms
Spaulders [Class2 Arm Partial] articulated metal bands (lames) covering the shoulders, joined by straps of leather or rivets.
Pauldrons [Class3 Arm Partial] large metal dome ("cop") that covers the shoulder and armpit, with metal bands (lames) for upper arms.
Mail Sleeves [Class3 Arm] a tube of chain mail covering the arms.
Plate Arms [Class4 Arm] fully enclosed plate arms.
Hands
Hand armor hinders delicate work like picking locks, playing musical instruments, etc. The GM might raise Hazard or say you fail.

Leather Gauntlets [Class1 Hand] sturdy leather gloves with boiled leather reinforcements 
Demi-Gauntlet [Class2 Hand Partial] leather gloves with partial steel coverage on the back of the hand and wrist only.
Mail Mitten Gauntlet [Class2 Hand] chain mail mittens
Knight’s Gauntlet [Class3 Hand] fully articulated steel finger gauntlets covering the entire hand. Rare and expensive.
Mitten Gauntlet [Class4 Hand] extremely protective steel plate mittens. easy to obtain and ideal if your weapon does not have a hand guard (such as a polearm) and you do not have a buckler.
Waist
Purse [Class1 Waist Partial] a stuffed fabric or leather pouch filled with your metal coins, worn over your irreplaceable valuables.
Bollock Dagger [Class1 Close Short Waist Partial] a dagger with distinctive two-balled hilt, worn front and center as a fashion statement, useful and protective at the same time.
Codpiece [Class1 Waist Partial] an important fashion item consisting of a stuffed fabric or leather pouch enclosing the genital area, and padded as needed to safeguard or enhance its contents.
Hero Belt [Class3 Waist Partial] is an exaggeratedly wide belt with an even larger buckle, worn by champions to safeguard their legacy.
Faulds [Class3 Waist] are pieces of articulated plate armor worn below a breastplate to protect the waist and hips. 
Culet [Class3 Waist Partial] a piece of plate armor consisting of small, horizontal lames that protect the buttocks.
Cuisses [Class3 Waist Partial] articulated plate armor for the thighs.
Plate Codpiece [Class3 Waist Partial] a solid metal codpiece, maybe it rings like a bell.
Legs
Shoes [Class1 Leg Partial] hard leather shoes
Cloth leg wraps [Class1 Leg Partial] simple flax or woven cloth strips to provide some protection to the legs and knees.
Boots [Class1 Leg Partial] hard leather boots covering the ankle
Riding Boots [Class1 Leg Partial] hard boots coming up to the knees.
Greaves [Class3 Leg Partial] metal plates to protect the shin.
Armor Tags
Arm armor protects the arms, up to the hands.
Civil armors and helmets are “civil looking”, do not draw attention, and are legal to wear in cities, towns, inns, etc.
Cloak armor is in the shape of cloak, mantle, or cape. This tends to flutter behind you, and only counts as Partial armor (see below).
Custom armor and helms are higher-quality, bespoke and expertly fitted. Rare and expensive both to obtain and also to maintain or repair. You can add a number like Custom2, Custom3, and so on to represent artistic embellishments such as gold leaf or elaborate shapes like wild beasts or dragons.
Front armor only covers the front of the body; it is open-backed.
Hand is armor for the hand(s). This hinders delicate work like picking locks, playing musical instruments, etc.
Leg armor protects the legs and knees.
Partial armor only covers a portion of the Hit Location, so it only protects you if you roll ASSET. However, it does not count as Coverage or reduce your number of Maneuvers per Round.
Waist armor protects the hips, thighs, and other important parts. 
Advanced Armor Tags - Helms
Helm is armor that protects the head. The vast majority of helms are “open faced" and do not cover the face, so they do not hamper vision or breathing. Helms cover the sides of the head, making it difficult to hear, play music, etc.
Hat helms are helms that only cover the top of the head. They offer less protection (reflected in their AC), but do not hinder hearing.
Closed helms completely cover the wearer's face, which is hugely protective (reflected in their AC). This sacrifices comfort, visibility, and breathability. Closed helms make it hard to see and hear. 
Visor helms have a moveable plate, so you can use a Maneuver to change between an “open” faced helm and a Closed helm. In terms of protection, the difference is enemies might target your face if your helm is open, but this is not typical in game play.
Gorget armor protects the throat.Shields
Shields are pieces of moveable armor, primarily used when full armor is impractical or unavailable. A character without strong armor can pick up a shield and immediately cover some lines of attack, depending on its size and “guard” position held. 
Shield Guards
Shields are moveable armor which can be positioned to a Guard. Each Guard covers one Hit Location for one side (right or left). Your shield will cover your "Left Torso" Guard unless you use a Maneuver to change Guards. 

In addition, your shield protects the Hand holding the shield. Medium and Large shields also protect that Arm. Only Large shields may guard the leg. See Weapon and Shield Guards for more advanced details. 
Medieval Shields
Buckler [Class3 Small Centergrip] small common shield, gripped in the fist, and used as a companion weapon. It could be made of metal or boiled leather, round (brocchiero) or square (targa). Inexpensive, easily carried, and readily available.
Target [Class3 Small Strapped] small wooden round shield, worn strapped to the arm, such as the Scottish target or smaller Viking shield. Inexpensive and readily available.
Round shield [Class4 Medium Centergrip] light wooden round shield, such as a Viking shield. Inexpensive and common.
Heater [Class3 Medium Strapped] smaller version of the kite shield suited for both mounted and foot combat.
Rotella [Class4 Medium Strapped] strapped metal round shield held at arm’s length from the body.
Large round [Class3 Large Centergrip] large wooden round shield, such as a larger Viking shield.
Kite [Class4 Large Strapped] A distinctive shield in a reverse teardrop shape used by horsemen to protect the left flank and leg.
Aspis [Class5 Large Strapped] huge deeply-dished wooden shield.
Tower Shield [Class5 Large Strapped] rectangular tal shield.
Pavise [Class6 Large Standing] very large semi-portable wall shield to protect crossbowmen in siege warfare.
Shield Tags
Small: covers the Hand, but cannot guard the Leg
Medium: covers the Hand and Arm, but cannot guard the Leg
Large: covers the Hand and Arm, and can guard the Leg.
Advanced Shield Tags
Civil shields are “civil looking” and will not generally draw attention.
Centergrip shields have a handle in the center of the shield, which is gripped so that the shield can be easily moved to various positions. They can be easily equipped or dropped, and the hand can be used to grab. This style of grip results in a more maneuverable shield, so is ideal for one-on-one combat, but only lighter and smaller shields can be held this way (i.e. with a smaller Shield Class).
Strapped shields are attached to the arm by two stout straps (“enarmes”), and heavier versions often rest on the shoulder. They are simple to use since they close off the left side of the body, and the defender tends not to move them at all. Strapped shields take longer to equip or drop than a centergrip shield, but unlikely to be dropped by accident. This style of shield works well on horse and on foot, and can support heavier shields than a centergrip. Strapped shields cannot protect the right side of the body (i.e. no "right" Guards are possible) so use your weapon to guard your right side. 
Custom shields are higher-quality, bespoke and perfectly made.
Standing shields are movable walls on posts or stands, setup as static cover. Moving a Siege shield and setting it back down takes an Action. The benefit is that the fighter’s hands are free, which is useful if you want to reload a crossbow.
Magic Items / Eldar Assets
The Eldar civilizations of aeons past created many things, some dark and beautiful, others bright and deadly. You might find Eldar relics during in your adventures, perhaps lost in deep caverns or in battle with terrible guardians. Or you might encounter Eldar (living or undead) wielding archaic blades of mysterious metals. Some of the mightiest works of the Eldar are named in stories, often born by famous heroes, and sometimes even more famous (or infamous).
Designing Eldar Assets
When describing Eldar Assets, think in terms of which Signatures and Secrets the Asset should have. For example, A Signature like "Drisi Orichalcum plate armor" protects against hostile magic (Saving Throws vs magic upgrades ASSET). A "Drisi Vakaar Dagger” could raise Stress if you attempt to stabilize the Doom. Lastly, the "Avathar Book of Shadows" is a Book of Secrets Asset with a "shadow magic" Signature. Overall it's better to be creative and flexible than to have a definitive list.
Eldar Materials
Eldar materials are often exotic and wondrous in the eyes of mortals.
Adamant: A blued steel renowned for hardness and sharpness. The metal starts as normal steel, which is then alchemically tempered, darkening its color to a beautiful blue-grey.
Bladegrass: A fibrous plant that can be used to craft items normally well-suited for leather. The Alu use bladecrass exclusively instead of leather, crafting items such as armor, boots, and saddles. The main benefits over leather is better resistance to moisture, as bladegrass will not hold soak up or swell with water. In addition, bladegrass is naturally edged and the Alu craft some unusual items such as flexible knives and sharp-edged bladegrass whips.
Moonsilver: A silvery steel alloy that can absorb and shed moonlight, making it not only beautiful and useful but revered by devotees to Lunara. The Alu and Elves in particular have a love for moonsilver, and use it to make jewelry, armor, and swords.
Night Iron: A dark steel alloy that absorbs light, and thus appears darker than dark, like a hole from which no light escapes. The Alu used night iron to craft armor and blades, and the secrets of its source and manufacture are completely unknown.
Orichalcum: A brassy alchemical alloy that can be cast into various shapes, such as amulets, rings, weapons, and armor. Orichalcum is reputed to have some resistance to magic, and was a favored metal of the Alu, Baal, and Drisi, who cast amulets of protection, magic-cutting blades, and magic-soaking armor. You can upgrade ASSET on Saving Throws vs magic where the Hit Location is covered by orichalcum. However you must pay an extra point of Vim if you attempt to use magic involving a Hit Location covered by orichalcum.
Vakaar: An infamous meteoritic iron alchemical alloy, appearing blackened, purple, or green, often with flecks of blood red. Vakaar is used almost exclusively to make "venom blades" infamous for inflicting wounds that do not heal naturally, and resist stabilization (the GM may increase Stress). Such blades are often wavvy or undulating. The secrets of making Vakaar blades are lost, rumored to be forged in darkness with many layers of folded steel, washed or infused with acid, poisons, venoms, blood, souls, forged with dark prayers to the Serpent Gods.
Alu Assets
Alu Dart Knives (as-en) [Class1 Close Short Stabbity Far1] the dart-like throwing knives of the Alu warriors
Alu Sickle Sword (av-tlen) [Class2 Medium Binding Defensive Hooking Cutty] the deeply curved sickle sword of the Alu, a weapon capable of hooking and trapping a foe's limbs, but also a tool in cutting through jungle overgrowth or bladegrass. 
Alu Kel Sword (av-kel) [Class3 2H Medium Binding Defensive Cutty] the long sword of the Alu warriors.
Alu Bladestaff [Spear Class3 2H Medium Far1] an ornate staff with a hidden blade. Variants with other hidden weapons have also been found, such as a spring-dart knife, whip, or smoke egg.
Alu Bladegrass Cloak [Class2 Soft Cloak Partial] fluttering cloak of silken bladegrass strands
Alu Bladegrass Cuirass [Class3 Body-Armor] thick bladegrass strands covering the torso and head, including a war mask
Alu Smoke Egg [Class0 Far1] An egg or paper-thin metal capsule containing smoke, orichalcum dust, or chili powder. The egg can be thrown or crushed to creat a person-sized cloud.
Avathar Assets
Avathar have a variety of specialized instruments for delivering potions. The instruments require specialized training only available to members of the Royal Avathar Guild of Alchemists.
Syringe: Avathars can purchase empty syringes and fill them with potions. This allows you to deliver potions with pinpoint precision, maximizing their effectiveness. Alternatively, you to administer the potion to another person as an armed attack (not unarmed), although the potion only produces its normal effects.
Catheter: Avathars use a variety of catheters, which inject a potion directly into the blood system. This has the same effect as using a syringe, but the potion is always considered "readied", and using the potion is an Action.
Dead Man's Switch: Avathars can hook up a failsafe switch to a catheter that automatically delivers the potion if you falls unconscious or some other state of helplessness (e.g. paralyzed, petrified, beguiled, etc).
Blood Flies:  Some Avathars raise blood flies as gruesome pets, fed on the Avathar’s own demi-vampiric blood and trained to alert him to potential food (upgrade ASSET for related rolls). These Avathars are experts at detecting or tracking creatures of flesh and blood. The Avathar can call back his flies and hide them on his person, but hinder social interactions since they are disgusting.
Drisi Assets
The Drisi empires ruled the world aeons ago, and their relics can be found in any land and in many underworlds. 
Adamant Scorpion [Class3 Long] a long bladed polearm of shadowed steel with incredible cutting properties.
Orichalcum Serpent Ring [Class0 Gauntlet] brassy colored Eldar steel ring which absorbs magic. Magic-users generally avoid this ring, unless they do not use this hand for casting spells.
Orichalcum Scale Armor [Class2 Half-Armor] is made of small brassy Eldar steel plates attached to each other and to a backing of cloth or leather in interlocking rows
Orichalcum Buckler [Class3 Small Centergrip] brassy colored Eldar steel which absorbs magic
Orichalcum Breastplate [Class3 Body-Armor] brassy Eldar steel breastplate, only covering the front, worn over clothing
Vakaar Falchion [Class3 Medium Binding Defensive Cutty] evil wavvy-bladed sword made of cracked dark purple or green steel. Wounds do not heal naturally
Draconecroalchemy Assets
Some of the Baal-Mot, Drisi, and Black Wizards have tapped into the vast power of dead dragons. This brings enmity from Baal.
Blue Dragon Orb: A glassy sphere filled with a flickering spark of dragon magic; assists with magic of air, electricity, and weather.
Dracontia / Dragon Orbs: are small crystalline spheres that contain a portion of a dragon’s soul. A small flickering flame or spark can be usually seen in the sphere. They are prized by wizards of all kinds. Dragon orbs are most often a remnant left behind after a dragon’s death. Each orb is a shard or fragment of the dragon’s soul at the moment of death--the orb itself is a quasi-physical manifestation similar to an Incarnation. The fragment has power based on the strength of the dragon’s soul and the manner of its death. The strongest orbs come from dragons who felt betrayed, leaving a fragment of the dragon’s soul in an angry, vengeful state.
Dragonbone Dagger: An assassin's blade dealing a wound that will not heal on its own.
Dragonbone Staff: A potent focus for controlling and conjuring fire. The staff is five feet in length to honor (or appease) the Dragon Gods, expertly turned from black dragonbone, and etched with draconic symbols. The staff feels smooth and warm to the touch, or burning hot to those who displease the Dragon Gods. Greatly prized by Black Wizards and seen as heretical by dragon worshipers.
Dwur Assets
Thaumatagonnes (‘Runelocks”) are the famous and formidable Dwur firearms and cannons. The heavy metal barrels of these weapons are forged in fantastical shaped and covered in Thaumaturgical runes. The runes strengthen the barrel, allowing the use of more powerful alchemical powder than the simple black powder used in Alorn handgonnes. Some Thaumatagonnes bear additional enchantments or improvements that the Alglonds firearms cannot replicate. Runelocks are a form of flintlock with a Thaumaturgical rune on the “Runelock” striker which magically resets the striker when the rune is spoken. However, Runelocks can only be reloaded if you have the “Runelock” Secret, only known by Dwur, and the Themes Dwur and Thaumaturge reduce the Reload time by 1 each.

Runelock Dwuringer pistol [Class3 Far2 Accurate Reload6 Secret] is a single-shot holdout pistol that fits inside a belt buckle or boot
Runelock Revolver [Class4 Far3 Accurate Reload5 Secret] can hold six-shots, reload cost is for reloading 1-6 cartridges
Runelock Pistol [Class5 Far3 Accurate Reload5 Secret] single shot
Runelock holy water sprinkler [Class4 2H Far Reload7 Secret] is a "hand-cannon-mace-pistol" with the mace head containing four pistols. Each barrel must be loaded and fired independently. 
Runelock Doppelpistol [Class5 Far2 Accurate Reload5 Secret] two barrels, each of is loaded and fired independently.
Runelock dungeon sweeper [Class6 2H Far3 Reload5 Secret] is a double-barreled shotgun meant for up-close and personal combat. Each barrel must be loaded and fired independently. 
Thaumasweeper [Class6 2H Far3 Reload6 Secret] a Dwur Thaumaturgical "dungeon sweeper" cast in alchemist’s iron and etched with thaumaturgical runes. 
Runelock carbine [Class7 2H Far4 Reload5 Secret] a light rifle
Runelock longrifle [Class8 2H Far5 Heavy Accurate Reload6 Secret] a long-barreled heavy rifle
Thaumagonne [Class7 2H Far4 Reload10 Secret] a Dwur Thaumaturgical handgonne cast in alchemist’s iron and etched with thaumaturgical runes. 
Thaumacannon [Class8 Crew Far4 Reload12 Secret] a Dwur Thaumaturgical cannon cast in alchemist’s iron and etched with thaumaturgical runes. The cannon barrel is heavy (20#) and usually fitted to a stock, staff, or wheeled frame. The barrels are often cast in fantastical shapes such as dragons, rockets, or mountain scenes. An alchemist can load the cannon with fire, stones, bullets, or any number of explosive or incendiary magic concoctions or fireworks. This charges the cannon with a single, specific spell (such as fireball or lightning bolt) which you must describe in detail.
Ithilrhi (Elven) Assets
Ithilrhi (Elven) Chainmail [Class3 3Qtr-Armor Custom] is a suit of armor with tiny interlocking rings. If custom-made for the wearer this does not require a gambeson (normally required for chainmail armor) and can be worn under clothing.
Magic-User Assets
Magic-users use wands, orbs, and other"magical focuses" to help them channel magic, such as the items below.
Book of Shadows: A grimoire of Umbracala shadow magic spells.
Diadem of the Third Eye a pendant suspended above your brow, in the position of your third eye, usually A of jewel or precious stone.
Eye of Horus one of your palms has been tattooed with magical patterns resembling a third eye
Hamsa this ornate amulet depicts the "hand of the goddess" with the third eye, which can be worn on a chain or pin.
Hex Hands your hands are covered in magical tattoos, and very potent when used together.
Ioun Stone a rare stone, crystal ball, or dracontia. Held in one or two hands when used, or with a Secret can be released to hover by you.
Runesword [varies by specific sword type] legendary rune-inscribed sword wielded by Eldar battlesingers
Singing Bow Elven warbow exquisitely carved and inlaid with silver leaf, which channels vim into the arrows as they leave the bow.
Sorcerer's Focus your clean-shaven head is tattooed with magical ink, tracing magical patterns to project your thoughts into reality
Summoners Grimoire: A book of summoning and binding rituals and spells. The magic-user must recite the ritual spell directly from the book, often inscribing magic circles or patterns on the floor according to the specific ritual. 
The Evil Eye one of your eyes is capable of a truly malevolent glare, yet prone to becoming bloodshot if used too often
The Magic Finger one of your fingers (you pick!) is tattooed with magical inks and can shoot a ray of magic
Wizard's Wand a sturdy rod the length of your arm from finger tips to elbow, often made of bundles of sticks to help channel magic.
Wizard's Staff stout staff, ideal for defense and focusing power.
Legendary Asset Names
Legendary Assets are kick-ass, and so they should have kick-ass names! Here are some examples to kick-start you writing your own.

Weapon Names
Asskicka!
Skullcrusher
Sineater
Inquisitor
Sunblade
Dawnbreaker
Tranquility
Lightbringer
Nightfall
Patience
Harmony
Mercy
Sword of Life
Hater
Twilight
Doomsong
Soulsplitter
Starhammer
Soultaker
Widowmaker
Frostcutter
Bloodletter
Kinslayer
Fellcleanser

Famous Weapon Names (no claim to originality)
Arondight 
Ascalon 
Caliburn
Clarent 
Durandal
Galatin
Foehammer
Stormbringer
Mourneblade
Part 9: Game Master’s Guide
This last part of the book contains advice for you, the GM, to run your game, along with some additional game rules, options, and quick reference tables.

Whether you are creating your own world or reusing an existing work, you need to describe the fictional world to the players. Without this, there is no game. Vividly portray NPCs, monsters, and other elements; add drama, voices, and detail. Find ways to draw the players and their characters into the world and create verisimilitude. Also describe imminent threats and foreshadow future dangers.
Starting a Campaign
Follow these steps to get a new campaign up and running quickly.

Introduce the setting - Pick a genre and come up with some idea of the game world and starting scene. You can use an existing campaign setting or come up with your own. Legends works with any genre, but pick something familiar unless you have time to prepare. It’s also a good idea to talk with your players to find out what genres they are interested in playing.
Introduce characters - Work with each player to help them make characters. Try to create a group chemistry that works together. Introduce the characters to each other, and prompt each player to give a summary of his character. 
Experience Paths - Ask each player to write one or two paths so that everyone has a good idea of what motivates them. You might need to help players do this, which is a good way of providing “hooks” into the campaign setting. Also set one Path before the players for a rumor or quest they have heard about, so that the world feels alive. Players can update their characters to add relationships or better align goals.
Strong Start - Kick off your first game session with a “strong start” such as a battle or other challenge. Be sure to narrate the encounter, set Hazard, and follow turns, etc, so that you teach the players how to play the game.
Resolution - Once players resolve the challenge, let them take a few turns looting, resting to lower Stress, or exploring. Point out how those require Actions, and that turns are continuous so you are continuing to roll Encounters. Ideally let the players find a clue that kicks off another Path.
Next - If anyone was hurt, explain how Dooms work. Also prompt the players to choose a new Experience Path. Roll an Encounter to add urgency and pressure. 
Managing the Game
You are responsible for explaining the rules and ensuring the game runs smoothly. Make rulings that are consistent, sensible, and fair, so that players understand their choices and know those choices matter. You may need to make “house rulings” for anything not explicitly covered in the rules, and you should try to track those and keep them consistent for your campaign. Keep the current Hazard visible so players understand their odds for success.
Flow of Play
The game is structured in Rounds. Each player can take one Turn per round. The GM starts each Round, and manages transitions into/out of the round, as well as into player Turns.

GM Turn (starts each round):
GM rolls a random Event (table at back of book)
GM narrates the scene, describing urgent updates to the situation, attacks, obvious threats, changes such as movement of foes or NPCs, as well as details about the environment or foreshadowing of future threats.
GM sets Hazard to define the difficulty of the scene. Setting Hazard low creates a slow-paced scene, and setting Hazard high creates a fast-paced scene.
GM describes Maneuvers & Actions of NPCs & monsters.
Players may interrupt with Maneuvers and GM can use a Maneuver Phase if necessary. However, Saving Throws and Actions must wait for the player’s turn.
Player Leader (i.e. ”party leader” or “caller”) may describe the intentions of the group of players. If appropriate, narratively fast-forward to a new round.
Player Turns (for each player):
GM chooses a player (usually clockwise around the table) and Transitions into the player’s turn. GM describes any new or urgent info and declares required Saving Throws.
Player Turn
Player declares what they will do for their turn. The player needs to match the pace described by the GM, so these are possibly long narratives, or lightning fast in combat.
GM should clarify any gross misconceptions,  misunderstandings, or miscommunications implied by the player’s declaration, as needed.
Player rolls Saving Throws (if applicable). This is simultaneous with the player Action.
Player takes 1 Action and up to 3 Maneuvers, making a roll if necessary.
GM tracks any Hits scored (one per player roll).
GM describes Consequences for a Fumble, if any, possibly calling for a Saving Throw.
GM Transitions out of player’s turn
GM Turns
Roll a random Event at the start of your turn. This provides a seed for inspiration and reminds you to check a few game details.

Describe the current scene. Since much of the game is theatre of the mind, it’s important to clearly describe what you are imagining, so that your players can make good, well-informed choices. 

If at any time the players interrupt and immediately leap into action, then stop talking and resolve their actions.

Start by describing the most interesting, dramatic or dangerous elements of the scene, such as NPCs, monsters, and terrain hazards. For example, you might describe a huge ogre with a spear rushing the players, and remind them of the cliff edge on their left. Raise Hazard appropriately. If there are foes then describe how they move and what they appear to be doing. Make the environment feel alive. 

Otherwise, if the players allow you to continue, then give a general description of what the players see, hear, and smell. Emphasize any points of interest such as entrances, exits, and loot, e.g. “you see a bed, a table, a gold book stand, and a large hole in the ceiling”. Don’t go into detail, and then pause, allowing the players to direct the conversation, such as asking questions like “is there a chair?”, “is there a book?”, “how big is the hole?”, etc. If the players seem confused or log-jammed, then encourage them to ask questions to clarify (“Feel free to ask me questions”).

Never mention anything concealed from player view, whether that is due to line of sight or it was intentionally hidden. Something could be behind a tapestry, under a bed, in a chest, on a body, etc. Players will only find such things if they move to change their point of view or actively search, and how they describe this is important. This is a puzzle for the players to solve, so do not give away the answers, such as telling players when they pass by loot.

Always look for opportunities to foreshadow complications or threats, and Raise Hazard. Especially foreshadow any immediate dangers such as attacks which will require a roll from a player.
End your turn by narrating a Transition into the first player’s turn. 
Player Maneuver Interrupts
Players are allowed to interject with Maneuvers at any time, and are likely to do so in the middle of your turn or narrative. Acknowledge the Maneuver, interweave it into your narrative, and keep the game flowing. For example, if you are describing how a “dark cowled figure rises from the mists” a player might say “I draw my sword”. Maneuvers are simple and don’t require rolls, so you can keep going.

If necessary, you can start a Maneuver Phase, to resolve any complicated simultaneous Maneuvers. Simply pause the game and take the Maneuvers in slow motion, allowing players to fine-tune their response to the changing scene. 
Player Turn Transitions
Always describe a Transition into each player’s turn. This puts the focus on the player, and gives you a crucial chance to re-state and re-describe the area for the player, ensuring clear communication and making meaningful player choices possible. Don’t worry about repeating yourself, the players really do need it.

During a Transition, reiterate all critical information. Use direct wording like “you see” or “(your name) sees” to describe what the player’s character sees. Most especially, always declare immediate threats such as monster attacks, traps, area-effect attacks, or other dangers which will require the player to roll a Saving Throw.

Since you are Transitioning into each player’s turn, you are also controlling turn order. You can use clockwise seating order around the table for simplicity, or use proximity to a threat, or you can bounce around to shake things up. Experiment with this. You can also narrate the Transition out of a player’s turn if desired. 

The floating NPC Turn can happen at any time, but you should Transition into the NPC Turn if you are attacking the NPC. This means you should usually declare attacks on NPCs first, before transitioning into the first player’s turn.
Time Tracking
Keep strict track of time that passes. Without this, the game will lack realism. The players will feel no pressure to act swiftly or pay attention to details such as provisions and transportation.
Tracking Hours
Track the hour of the day, as on a clock. For example, you might tell the players “you wake and break camp at 6am”. Advance the clock by an hour each time the players engage in an activity. Just track whole hours, rounding up.

make camp
follow a trail
combat
open stuck door
find traps
find secret doors
solve puzzle/riddle
eat a meal
evade pursuers 


Keep the clock visible to the players so they are mindful of the passage of time. The Legends Scorekeeper has a simple clock with hours from 1-12.

- The “6” hour is bolded since that is the average time for sunrise and sunset. These are good points to ask the player what they are going to do for their day or night, possibly getting them back on track if they have been distracted.
Raise Stress if the players do not describe eating, sleeping, etc.
Raise Stress if the players are carrying a lot of gear or loot, especially if they have closed helms.
Require players to cross off resources such as torches, lanterns, and magic light spells every hour.
Tracking Days
You should keep track of which day it is. Simply pick a day to start with, e.g. Sunday, and then advance the day whenever you pass 24 hours. The Legends Scorekeeper has a convenient column for this.
Fast-Forward
It's important to keep the game flowing, so feel free to fast-forward past boring stretches of time, such as camping for a night, riding for a few days, traveling by ship for a month, etc. You can still use rounds and turns, just remind players during Transition to their turns that the game is on fast-forward, so the timescale is longer (e.g. 1 day rather than 6 seconds) so they can get more done. Go back to normal-time as soon as something interesting happens, such as running out of food, a storm, or an ambush, and don’t be afraid to rewind a bit to the start of the interesting event.
Clocks
A Clock is a countdown timer to some event, which could be as simple as the end of the day or as dramatic as a race to escape a flooding dungeon. Clocks can also represent player progress.

hours until sunset
travel time to the next city
you’ve been poisoned
evil ritual in progress
dungeon is flooding
running out of food
decipher ancient glyphs
next random encounter
hunters looking for you
hours of work building a fort

To start a Clock, draw a pizza on a piece of paper, giving it six slices or so. Cross-out slices as time passes or progress is made. Clocks help create a sense of time pressure for the players, helping to keep the game moving along and avoid “analysis paralysis”.
Using Hazard
Hazard is your volume knob for difficulty and dramatic tension. Raise Hazard whenever you narrate anything which makes the situation more dangerous, especially when you foreshadow a threat of some kind. Lower Hazard as the players make progress to overcome those challenges.

Difficulty - Use Hazard to quantify the current difficulty and risk. This is be based on many squishy details such as terrain, situational dangers, monsters, etc. A battle in a building on fire is both more difficult and more risky than on level ground. 
Dramatic Tension - Use Hazard to make dramatic tension feel concrete. Raise Hazard as you head into a climax.
Outclassed - Raise Hazard if the players are clearly out-classed in terms of weapons and armor. 
Outmaneuvered - Raise Hazard when foes take the high ground, flank, or encircle the players. You can foreshadow this to Raise Hazard earlier. Lower Hazard when the players break free.
Player Choices - Use Hazard to provide the players with meaningful choices where they know the odds. For example, if you describe how there are strong winds and loose tiles on the rooftops, and Raise Hazard, the players can make their decision which route to take. Or if you describe how an evil priest lights an unholy lanthorn that strengthens undead nearby, and Raise Hazard, then clever players might shoot that lanthorn to lower the Hazard back down.  Player choices matter; use Hazard to inform those choices.
Pace - Use Hazard to control pace. By setting Hazard low, you are signaling the players that they are reasonably safe and can take their time to explore, be introspective, or engage in a long drawn-out narrative. By Raising Hazard you are telling the players that the situation has changed and they need to react quickly.
Foreshadowing - Use Hazard to make your foreshadowing reality for the players. Describe remnants of prior victims (“look at the bones!”), deep footprints of a massive beast, claw marks on trees, blood trails. If you raise Hazard the players will know you are serious. Using foreshadowing adds tension and wonder and gives players a chance to avoid trouble. If a monster should be especially dangerous then develop the threat over multiple turns. 
Secrets - Raise Hazard whenever a monster reveals a Secret such as a special attack, special ability, special defense, etc.
Safety - Reset Hazard when the PCs find a place of safety and you want to lower the tension back down. Players need a break from the tension now and then. 
No Rest for the Weary - If players find a spot to rest and you don’t lower Hazard, that’s a sign to the players that they do not feel safe here, or you want to keep the story pace moving fast.

It’s possible that some situations will result in character death. That is fine as long as the players chose to be in the deadly situation, rather than being surprised due to a lack of information. Following the guidelines for raising Hazard will ensure you are providing adequate clues and warnings about the danger that is building.
Using Stress
Stress is your volume knob for making the characters feel human. Raise Stress whenever you describe something that would shock, unnerve, or start to unravel the sanity or stamina of a brave, tough human. Raise Stress when a player finds a trap with the remains of a prior dead adventurer.

tired
hungry
lack of sleep 
lost
darkness
dead adventurers
character death
eldritch horror
magical fear
disease
torture
horror

Note that getting hit or hurt can also Raise Stress, but this is applied when the player Soaks Damage. 
Play with Fear
Play with normal human stressors and fears. Getting lost is stressful, especially in the dark and with goblyns hunting you. The purpose of Stress is to make the PCs feel human. Sure, they are stone-cold adventurer murder-hobos and all that, but they are still people. All the stuff you see adds up and you have to unwind and destress all of it somehow. You could take this as far as supernatural horror if you and your group of players like that sort of thing. There are also plenty of childhood terrors to exploit. (However, practice empathy and make sure you aren’t crossing anyone’s boundaries.)
Stress Resistance
If a player has a Secret that might counteract the Stress, you can allow the player to spend Vim instead of raising Stress.
Reducing Stress
As long as the situation is reasonably non-stressful, the players can reduce Stress to 1 in a relatively short time by roleplaying human actions such as resting, eating, playing music, complimenting others, or blowing off steam.

You can allow players to reduce Stress to 0 if they are celebrating a major victory with a great feast, epic tavern party, etc. There should be NPCs involved, and possibly they will put on the celebration.
Miniumum Stress
Enforce a minimum Stress as follows:
If the situation is stressful, such as combat or a chase, or the players have not slept in the past 24 hours, then the players can only reduce Stress by using Secrets, which costs Vim.
Dooms set a minimum Stress, which is the number of Dooms, or the highest Doom Stage, whichever is higher.
Going without sleep sets a minimum Stress, which is the number of consecutive days without sleep.
Negative Vim sets a minimum Stress, which is the number of points below zero. (So if Vim is -5 then the minimum Stress is 5.)
Play to find out what happens
Whenever you present a challenge, always step back and let the game play out to see what happens. Let the players freely choose what they do! They might not bite, or they might find a different way than you thought of, but that's fine because the game is about the players and the choices they make. The adventure should live on its own with or without the PCs.
Rewards
Rewards don't have to be big. Focus on fun. The best rewards are creative, unique, and quirky. Personal connections also make rewards more fun and memorable. Sometimes the reward is written as the Path itself. For example “Lenarin wants a proper Elvish sword” needs to end with Lenarin getting a sword he likes. A reward might also be part of the initial setup, such as the King promising “half his kingdom” for the return of the princess.
Random Events
As the GM, roll a random Event at the start of your turn. Use the Random Events table at the end of this book.Custom Events Tables
You can create custom Events tables for your campaign. Use the standard table as a guide, and fill your own table with your ideas.

dungeon of the...
on the road
inns & taverns
forest
mountains
NPC friends/foes
ships & ports
dungeon traps
villain schemes
boss battle plan
city of thieves
I loot the body!

Sample Event Table: The City of Thieves


Present compelling and challenging adventures to the players and step back to see what they do. Play foes to their true nature and full potential. Wild animals and bandits should craft clever ambushes, and genius villains should be formidable. Be devious, ruthless, and do not hold back. Give the players a game where they must rise to the challenge and respond with intelligent, skillful play, to survive and win. Describe present dangers, foreshadow possible threats and Raise Hazard, making your world ever more exciting and dangerous. 
Monsters
Monsters are enemies for the players to encounter, fight or outwit, slay, and loot. They are an opportunity for you to be creative and scare the players. Traps, spells, and other threats are the same.

Reveal new monsters during your turn, using vivid and exciting descriptions. Raise Hazard when revealing a monster or dangerous capability. Foreshadow the monster as early and often as possible, raising Hazard each time you add an ominous detail. 
Monster Stat Blocks
Monster stat blocks follow the OSR tradition (old school, or "original" RPGs). Thus, you can directly use all OSR books, adventure modules, websites, etc. Here are a few examples for illustration.

Giant Rat HD 0; SA swarm
Skeleton HD 1; SA undead immunities
Spitting Cobra HD 1; #At 1 (spit or bite); SA spit venom causes blindness, deadly bite venom +1 Doom
Goblin HD 1; SA 20% have missile weapons
Hobgoblin HD 2; SA 20% have missile weapons
Medusa HD 4; SA petrification, poison; W her own gaze
Werewolf HD 4; AC 3; #At 1; SA only hit by silver or magic weapons, Dooms carry curse of lycanthropy
Ogre HD 5; AC 3; WC5
Manticore HD 5; AC 3; #At 3; WC 3; SA flying, ranged spikes
Hydra of 6 Heads HD 6; #At 6; AC 3; SA heads double when cut; #At is number of heads
Basilisk HD 7; AC 3; #At 2 (bite, gaze); SA petrification by bite or gaze
Hill Giant HD 8; AC 3; WC 6; SA +1 Damage
Chimera HD 9; AC 3; #At 6; WC 3; SA fly, deadly snake tail venom +1 Doom, fiery breath 15’ cone

Monster Name HD 0; [AC 2;] [#At 1;] [WC 2;] [SA;] [W;]
Hit Defense (HD): Overall toughness of the monster. Monsters take Dooms like PCs, and can Soak 1 Damage per hit as long as their HD is more than the number of Hits scored. As with PCs, try to roleplay this. Soak +1 Damage if the monster has a special resistance to the damage.
Attacks (#At): Number of attacks per round; defaults to 1. Although players only get 1 attack (i.e. 1 Action) monsters can have multiple, since they are weird and often represent a single opponent/challenge for the players to defeat. For example a 6-headed hydra could easily have 6 attacks (one per head) for biting, stomping, trampling, tail whips, etc.
Armor Class (AC): Armor Class for defenses; defaults to 2 or set based on actual armor worn. Modify AC by +1 for each foot larger than human (-1 for each foot shorter).
Weapon Class (WC): Weapon Class for attacks; defaults to 2 or set based on actual weapons wielded. Modify WC by +1 for each foot larger than human (-1 for each foot shorter).
Special Abilities (SA): Secrets, special attacks, +1 Damage (for a giant weapon), +1 Doom (for deadly venom), and special defenses such as breath weapons, spells, resistances, immunities etc. Most monsters can see in the dark of their lairs. Monsters inflict Damage just like players (1 for a hit, 2 for a Crit) so any Damage bonuses are considered Special Abilities.
Special Weaknesses (SW): Add +1 Damage or +1 Doom when players exploit weaknesses or vulnerabilities.

Reuse stats from OSR books directly, except as follows:
HD: Use the HD directly, adding +1 if there is a modifier, so "HD 4" is HD 4 and “HD 4+2” is HD 5.
WC: Use human weapon when applicable. Otherwise count damage dice and add +1, so 1d8 is 2, 2d4 is 3, 3d6 is 4, etc. Add +1 if there is a large damage bonus. Add more for giants.
AC: By human armor when applicable. Otherwise AC3 if the monster is equivalent to chainmail, AC4 if plate, etc. 
Damage: Note that players and monsters always deal 1 Damage. Any special bonuses must be Special Abilities. For example a giant might have +1 Damage (which applies before armor) or a cobra might have +1 Doom (which only applies if Damage gets past armor). Damage and Doom bonuses are incredibly deadly, so be sure to foreshadow and scare the players ahead of time.

Describe any obvious Assets, and vary them to differentiate similar monsters. Scatter a few projectile weapons, heavy weapons, and heavy armor amongst the goblins to create a variety of challenges. Assets can be the most distinctive aspect of groups of creatures, e.g. “the goblin with the arbalest”. Raise Hazard when describing anything scary or unusual like poison arrows or man-catching nets.
Monster Hazard
Raise Hazard when you foreshadow monsters, when the monster finally appears, and when revealing special abilities. If you visualize the monster and describe how dangerous it is in detail, you will naturally come to a Hazard appropriate to the monster. The players will quickly learn to read these cues and get a sense of how dangerous the monster is. You can also mix things up and have a high-power monster with a low Hazard if it’s been caught out of its element, or low-power monsters at a high Hazard due to terrain (e.g. goblins defending a rope bridge over lava). 
Monster Maneuvers
As part of narrating the scene during your turn, describe how Monsters take Maneuvers to aim or move to flank the players. This helps the players make well-informed choices. Foreshadow attacks with a Maneuver of some kind, such as describing a goblin archer or troll aiming at a specific Hit Location. Limit each monster to one or two Maneuvers, according to its quickness and tactical abilities.

When possible maneuver groups of monsters as units. Raise Hazard if you have a group of monsters gang up on a player rather than attacking separately.
Monster Attacks
When a monster attacks, the targeted player must roll a Saving Throw or take Damage. Declare monster attacks on Transitions to player turns, because the Saving Throw occurs during the player’s turn and is considered simultaneous with any actions the player takes during their turn. You can also Raise Hazard if you also foreshadow the attack during your turn.

Try to add visual imagery and detail when possible, for example “the orc attacks you” isn’t as interesting as “the grey orc stabs at your unarmored leg with a rusty spear”. If you are teaching new players the game you might need to tell them directly to “[make a Saving Throw]", but over time they should roll without being prompted.

Reiterate any details you described during your turn; for example, if you said a monster was targeting a Hit Location without armor you should say it again in the Transition. Your players will learn that threats you foreshadow are more deadly and should be paid close attention, or neutralized with their own Maneuvers.
Monster Weapon Class
Set the monster Weapon Class based on a weapon it is using, or by comparing its attack with equivalent weapons. For example, giant rat teeth at best knife-sized, so they should be at most Class 1. Add a WC bonus if the monster is larger than humans, or has a dramatic attack (e.g. a shark bite). Do not raise WC for poison/venom.
Special Attacks
The hallmark of many monsters is one or more kinds of special attacks, such as petrification, poison, or energy drain. Special attacks usually result in special Dooms, which can have immediate effects (e.g. petrification) or require special treatment (e.g. venom). 

In general it's a good idea to foreshadow special attacks to keep them special and scary. Apply special attacks when you feel they will have the most dramatic impact. For example, a dragon shouldn't breathe fire every round, because that wouldn't be as dramatic as leading up to the breath of death by foreshadowing how the dragon breathes in and glares balefully. Highlight special attacks or special abilities when you roll ULT so they can surprise you and your players.

Special attacks deal Damage normally, but resulting Dooms may be difficult to stabilize. The bite of a cobra needs an anti-venom potion or spell. Similarly, a wound caused by an unholy wraith dagger might only be treatable by a few people in the world, and will otherwise fester and lead to undeath. You can limit the use of special attacks that are especially deadly or are hard to treat by only firing them off when you roll ULT for your Encounter. A wraith doesn't have to do its best undeath touch on every attack, and making it happen less often makes it more scary.
Multiple Monsters
If there are multiple monsters who could attack the player, consider calling for just one Saving Throw. This allows you to liberally throw waves and hordes of monsters at the players without requiring too many rolls or worrying too much about overloading the players. Not all monsters are organized; they can get distracted or stop to feed! 

Raise Hazard if you combine a group of monsters into one attack rather than making separate attacks. For example, in describing a hundred goblin archers “a black cloud of arrows falls upon you like barbed locusts”. This adds tactical challenges beyond the attack.

Lastly, you don’t always need to tell the players how many monsters there are. The players might fall into a dark pit on a pile of bodies and feel “many cold hands attempt to drag you down”. Each player would roll one Saving Throw, regardless of how many monsters are down there. Sometimes this is more creepy than knowing the odds.
Defeating Monsters
Monsters take Dooms like PCs, and Soak 1 Damage per hit until Hits scored passes HD. 

To track the Hits scored, simply tally each successful roll the players make within the encounter. The rolls do not need to be overt attacks, nor do they need to inflict damage, they just need to result in some kind of progress. Reset the score after the fight.

Most monsters will lose morale and flee when Hits exceeds HD.
Resistances and Weaknesses
Some monsters have special resistances and weaknesses. For example ghosts aren’t hurt by iron weapons but hate silver, or a wyrm might be invulnerable except for a spot above its heart. Apply a Damage modifier of +1/-1 as applicable. You can do this prior to Soak for strong resistances, or as part of Soak for weak resistances.

vulnerable on belly 
immune to fire 
immune to cold
ward pact vs swords
immune to weapons
mostly made of air
ghostly
armored head
impervious shell

Death Throes
A creature (whether a monster or player) at Doom3 goes into "death throes". The creature “drops”, goes into shock, and loses their ability to take actions other than random “death throes”, such as thrashing about, making messes and pitiful sounds, bleeding on or biting someone who gets too close, or making one last attack before expiring. Even “as good as dead”, monsters can still be dangerous. Snakes can be even be deadly after they are dead.
Regeneration
Monsters which have powerful regenerative or auto-healing abilities heal 1 Doom per turn. However Damage caused by weaknesses does not heal, e.g. trolls do not regenerate damage from fire or acid.
Describing Critical Hits
Players expect Critical Hits to be more awesome than normal rolls. Whenever possible, describe Critical Hits as the best possible outcome of how the player declared their attack. If the player said they were trying to do something specific then have that work; this takes precedence over other ideas you might have.

Finishing Blow - The monster dies dramatically if it has taken Damage in excess of its Hits. Describe a visceral end leaving no doubt the monster is dead (rolling heads, sprays of blood, fine red mist, etc.). If the player targeted a hit location, be sure to use it.
Aim - If the player targeted a specific hit location or capability of the monster, describe how that worked, such as disarming the foe or lopping off an arm, leg, etc. Clever players might find a way to target and remove specific monster capabilities, such as removing flight by lopping off a wing, or removing a magic shield by hitting a rune. Otherwise, if the player did not describe something specific, then you should come up with something you think is appropriate. 
Weapon Crit - Describe a dramatic or special benefit of the weapon used, e.g. a mace might crush a skull or a fireball might inflict collateral damage. Showcase the PCs choice of weapon.
Morale - The attack causes the monster to rethink wanting to be in the fight, and it might panic, retreat, flee, or surrender.
Wound - Despite still having Hits remaining, the monster is mortally wounded, but not yet incapacitated. Describe the wound in visceral detail. The monster will probably attempt to flee at the first opportunity, heading for its lair to lick its wounds. However, the monster now has a Doom and will probably die. Intelligent creatures might surrender if they feel that will be honored.
Interacting with Monsters
Monsters always want something specific, whether that’s food, water. territory, treasure, allies vs enemies, or new music. Ideally this is something the players have, are blocking, or can obtain, giving players a way to interact with the monster other than combat, and possibly manipulate the monster. There can be competing priorities, e.g. a tribe of ferocious baboons might want “man’s red fire or man’s red flesh”, causing players to carry extra torches in case they need to trade for their lives. Motivations make monsters feel real.

Talking monsters should always attempt to communicate. They will relate their needs, ask questions, boast, make demands, threaten, and curse. Give the monster a distinctive voice, such as whispering, gibbering, clacking, clicking, growling, or croaking. Also mix-in non-verbal communication, such as facial expressions, body language, gestures, and drawing. Magical monsters might use telepathy to whisper, biochemical lights to show pictures, or pheromones to communicate ideas via smell.
Monster Event Triggers
You can use your random Event to trigger special abilities, attacks, or behaviors. For example, giant ants might “swarm” on COMBO, or a dragon might breathe fire on ULT. Simply interpret your Event roll in the context of the monster. Some examples are below, but the whole point is to help you make the monster feel more chaotically real, so run this on the fly.


If you have time to plan a special monster encounter, you can even make a custom Event table for the monster.

Medusa HD 6; #At2; AC 3; S petrification, venom +1 Doom; W her own gaze; THEME rattlesnake sounds, EFFORT tries to establish gaze, ASSET dagger & bow, COMBO venomous snakes, ULT petrify creature meeting her gaze
Weird Monsters
Monsters are a staple of the fantasy genre, and are important because they provide fear of the unknown, and let you demonstrate to the players that there is weird scary shit out there. 

Use weird monsters sparingly, but when you use one take the time to make them interesting. You can pull out all the stops and make a monster really scary and weird. Load it up with special attacks and defenses. Give it an inhuman personality. Make it do or say something mysterious or creepy when it dies. 

You should leverage the wealth of fantasy literature and old RPGs out there. However, make the monsters yours by mixing and mashing them up, so that the monsters in your campaign are unique, mysterious, and terrifying.

The most important thing to do is to keep the monster mysterious. Never truly explain what it is or where it’s from. Foreshadow the monster, revealing fleeting glimpses and clues, but not letting the “camera” of your story reveal the monster until after you’ve milked it for all the dramatic effect you can.

Lastly, consider whether normal humans might fill the same role you have in mind. Resist adding humanoid monsters when an interesting human would do. Orcs are not any more interesting than brigands or highwaymen unless you make the effort to make them interesting.
Diseases
Characters resist most normal afflictions and diseases, but when they delve into dark and dramatically unclean places call for a Saving Throw if your Event roll is EFFORT. You should also do this when PCs have physical contact with something unclean such as a sewer, fungus monster, stale tomb air, etc.

Black spots
Blood eye
Bloody flux
Mange
Ifr’it fever
Kha’din taint
Lycanthropy
Mummy rot
Sleeping fits
Tomb lung
Vampiric hunger
Undead fungus
Werewolf curse
White cysts
Wizard’s twilight

NPCs
Each player takes on the role of one character in the game. Everyone else is an NPC (“non-player character”). You control all NPCs, including minions and hirelings of the PCs, and even characters whose player is absent.

Quickly create new NPCs with a few descriptive words, with a Theme for an occupation (e.g. baker, cook, driver, guard, scout), a Trait for a strength (e.g. clever, connected, quick, strong), and a Trait for a personality quirk (e.g. friendly, nosy, boorish). Add a Theme for an unusual ancestry (e.g. elf, dwarf, etc), and Assets for their gear. 

After introducing an NPC, step back and see what the players do. Make your NPCs come alive, but never forget they are the supporting cast of the story, and the spotlight is for the players. Be prepared to “let go” of even your favorite NPCs, allowing them to be marginalized or killed off. You can always make more!NPC Personas & Voices

NPC Occupations
acolyte, advocate, alchemist, apothecary, arbiter, armorer, assassin, assayer, astrologer, baker, bard, banker, blacksmith , bodyguard, bounty hunter, brewer, butcher, butler, candlemaker, carpenter , cartographer , chamberlain, chef, clerk, cobbler/shoemaker, concubine, cook, dancer, druid, dyer , engineer, executioner, falconer, farmer, fisherman , ferryman, fishmonger, furrier, gardener, gemcutter, prospector, goldsmith, groom, guard, guide, healer, herald/crier, herbalist, hunter, inquisitor, jongleur, knight, landlord, leatherworker, longshoreman, maid, mapmaker, mercenary, midwife, merchant, minstrel, miller, milkman, miner, monk, mortician, musician, page, painter, panhandler, peddler, potter, priest, prostitute, sage, sailor, scholar, scout, scribe, sculptor, shaman, shipwright, shopkeeper, silversmith, servant, serving wench, shepherd, singer, slave, slave-trader, soldier, sorcerer, spinster, squire, stable boy/girl, stonecutter, tailor, tax collector, teacher, thatcher, thief, town guard, tracker, urchin, vintner, wagon driver, weaponsmith, weaver, woodsman, wizard 
Hirelings & Henchmen
The characters may recruit hirelings or rescue them from dungeons. Must be fed and paid 1 sp every day (1 gp for men-at-arms) or will not takes risks. Adventurous hirelings may instead expect a share of the loot. As the GM, you can choose from these suggestions or roll.




Hopefuls (Crit) are the most competent and daring of young adventures in the making. Will generally exceed expectations and show qualities.
Losers (Fumble) are generally incompetent, except sometimes have a knack for pretending to be useful. Will royally screw up any assignment given them.
I Loot the Body!
A player can use an Action to quickly Loot a body or similarly sized area. As the GM, you determine what loot (treasure) is found. There are numerous GM aids available online for generating treasure, as well as some simpler approaches below.
Loot Value
Choose the value of the Loot or roll 1d20 vs Hazard (i.e. like a player would roll). Then shift the result by one step better if the fight was tough (e.g. causing a Doom) or if the monster had deadly special abilities.



Loot Variety
Use your Legend Die to add variety, details, or complications.


Describing Loot
Always give a general description of what the players can see in the area, with some emphasis on points of interest such as threats and loot, e.g. “you see a bed, table, book stand, and a hole in the ceiling”. Don’t go into detail, instead allow the players to direct the conversation by asking questions like “is there a chair?”, “is there a book?”, “how big is the hole?”, etc.

Never mention anything concealed from player view, whether that is due to line of sight or it was intentionally hidden. Something could be behind a tapestry, under a bed, in a chest, on a body, etc. Players will only find such things if they move to change their point of view or actively search, and how they describe this is important. This is a puzzle for the players to solve, so do not give away the answers, such as telling players when they pass by Loot.

Loot doesn’t need to be coins or items. Some monsters have valuable pelts, or the “Loot” could be a key, clue, or secret door.
Damaging Loot
The players might inadvertently damage or destroy Loot, reducing its value by one step on the table. They might shoot a “white wolf” full of holes, thereby destroying its valuable pelt. Some items are very fragile or flammable, such as books, scrolls, clothing, artwork, magic mushrooms, etc.
Carrying Loot
Players tend to accumulate long lists of items of treasure over their adventures. Players find this fun, so let them have their fun without onerous bookkeeping, even if it stretches the imagination a bit wondering how they are carrying it all. However, if they do find a sizable treasure trove or hoard then it’s a good time to ask them what they plan to do with it.GM Quick Reference
Armor Coverage
Armor is a tradeoff of Coverage and Maneuvers per Round.


Partial Armor only provides protection if you roll ASSET on your Saving Throw, but does not count as Coverage or reduce Maneuvers per Round.
Hit Locations
As the GM, include the Hit Location along with each attack, e.g. "The goblin falchion slices wickedly at your knee". Try to choose something both descriptive and appropriate, e.g. rats on the floor will usually attack low targets such as legs, but rats falling from the ceiling attack the head and shoulders, a caltrop trap hits under the foot, etc. If you prefer you can roll dice, using 1d6 on the table below.



You can specify left/right based on what seems natural, or roll a die odd (left) / even (right).

Area-of-Effect (AOE) Attacks still target a Hit Location. They are most likely to hit an extremity with low protection, such as hands, legs, or face.
Dooms
Dooms are very serious life threatening injuries or afflictions. You gain a Doom whenever you fail a Saving Throw and do not deal with all Damage. Each Doom has five checkboxes that indicate the Doom Stage. Check a box for each point of Damage taken for that Doom.



You can Soak 1 Damage each time you are hit. This is raises Stress. Roleplay what you do (feel free to let your creativity run wild and take "artistic license", since this is your heroic "plot armor”).

Combine Dooms of the same kind, especially if they are in the same Hit Location. For example, more wounds in the same location, additional poison, more extensive burns, etc. You can Soak Damage when combining Dooms, but the Doom Stage increases by a minimum of 1.

New Dooms are Unstable and you take +1 Damage each time you or the GM rolls EFFORT. Anyone can take an Action and roll to stabilize a Doom. On a Fumble you take +1 Damage.

Healing Dooms requires months of time for natural healing, or just a few hours via a healing Ritual.
Random Events
Roll at the start of every round.



In combat, use the same roll for monster Death Throes

AS ABOVE, SO BELOW
THE WORLD IS NEWBORN, bright and beautiful, full of life and boundless potential. Young kingdoms of man build on the unspoiled shores of the Dragon Sea. As they explore wildernesses and forge kingdoms they encounter ancient ruins, Eldar, dragons, and monsters, and mysteries of the old worlds. 

THE WORLD HAS DIED and risen anew in an infinite cycle. Each new incarnation blossoms and grows for an aeon, then dies in an apocalypse. Every reincarnation is a land for new peoples and civilizations and dragons, built on the stones and bones of the past. Every death adds another layer of history.

THE UNDERWORLDS are vast subterranean gigadungeons formed by the layers of countless precursor civilizations. Survivors compete for life in the dark cold below, fighting monsters and one another in their struggle to reach the surface. Yet, treasure hunters, adventurers, and doom cults seek tunnels into the Underworlds to plunder the riches of ancient aeons. Within the depths you will find dead cities, riches, artifacts, dragon lairs, monsters, vast tunnels and caverns inside dead dragons, trapped Eldar civilizations, imprisoned horrors, entrances to Kalla, and shrines to Gods with forgotten names. 

ELDAR are survivors of previous aeons. Once young like us, they have been forged, broken, and reforged in world-ending fire to something like fae or daemons. A few Eldar have realms above and below, but most are trapped below and seek the surface, or wander without a people or a home.. 

BUILD YOUR LEGEND as you explore the world, above and below. Write your character in your own words, with no numbers or limitations, and set your own goals for advancement. Then play in total immersion, with a unique new dice system that keeps you immersed in playing your “words only” character, rewarding good roleplaying and clever tactics.

THIS BOOK includes everything you need to start adventuring in the Dragon Isles, with a setting overview and full game rules.

Copyright © 2023 Paul Abrams. All Rights Reserved.